---
title: "Chapter Two: The Great Reforms"
type: "reading"
book: "1619: Jamestown and the Forging of American Democracy"
author: "James Horn"
chapter_num: 2
source: "Horn, James - 1619- Jamestown and the Forging of American Democracy.epub"
date_added: 2026-05-25
tags:
  - hist_21103
  - reading
  - 1619
---

1619 

#*Two*

# The Great Reforms

We have thought good to… the settling there of A laudable form of Government by Magistracy and just Laws for the happy guiding and governing of the people.

*—Virginia Company of London (1618)*

And these laws and ordinances are not to be chested or hidden like a candle under a bushel, but in form of a Magna Charta to be published to the whole colony.

*—Anonymous, “R. F.” (1618)*

BESIDES PROMOTING COMMERCE, COMPANIES INVOLVED in empire building were also responsible for establishing governments overseas. The broad range of proclamations and instructions issued by Virginia Company leaders during the great reforms of 1619 were designed first and foremost to create an effective form of government and civil society based on the idea of a commercial commonwealth—trade, prosperity, and Company profits would follow from good government. Of the developments that shaped this process, two stand out above all others: the establishment of private property and Company leaders’ decision to curtail martial law and end the military regime they had sanctioned. Sir Edwin Sandys and other officials of the Company who supported him were convinced that the most effective means of attracting substantial investment in the colony and large numbers of immigrants was to offer tangible incentives in the form of property. The shift from a society based on Company control of the land to a society founded on individual ownership was momentous and necessarily required wholesale changes to the way the colony was governed. Safeguarding private property was of paramount importance since without security of ownership the Company would not be able to persuade settlers or investors to involve themselves in the venture. Private property, just laws, and good government were all of a piece.[1](endnotes.md#en0045en)

BY THE TERMS OF ITS CHARTERS, LAND WITHIN THE BOUNDS of the Company’s grant was under the authority and at the disposal of the Company’s leadership. The charters of 1609 and 1612 had given the Company formal control of a vast area that encompassed much of the mid-Atlantic coastal region as well as unexplored territories to the west. Indian occupation of lands was recognized, but their absolute right of possession was not. While English colonizers were prohibited from claiming American regions possessed by other Christian sovereigns, notably the Spanish and Portuguese, they had the moral and legal right to settle lands inhabited by “heathens” and “savages.” Any number of justifications could be cited, from European laws that guaranteed the rights of Christians to trade wherever and with whom they wished to the “Law of God,” which enjoined monarchs to conquer “barbarous” peoples for the advancement of God’s word. From the very beginning of European colonization of America in the late fifteenth century, successive popes and monarchs had legitimized taking and inhabiting Indian lands.[2](endnotes.md#en0046en)

The different forms of landed property that might be adopted in the colony—small farms, large plantations, or corporate holdings—and exactly how individual or collective interests would be protected by law were vital considerations, the outcomes of which would have major implications not only for Virginia but all English colonies that followed. At first, no particular plan governed the introduction of private property other than expediency. The Virginia Company had sought initially to avoid conflict with local Indians by occupying only what they believed were vacant lands, but the onset of war in 1609 changed Jamestown’s leaders’ attitudes. Settlers quickly began taking up prime Indian lands along the James River valley.

Toward the end of the war Sir Thomas Dale had been forced to allow some of his men their own land as a means of encouraging increased food production. He had initially tried to compel them to work harder by adopting tough measures to supply the common store, but after several years it was clear the effort had failed. Most of them avoided work at all costs, actively hoping to bring about the collapse of the colony and their return home. With little personal incentive to produce more than the bare minimum, yields remained perilously low. “When our people were fed out of the common store,” planter and publicist Ralph Hamor explained, “and labored jointly in the manuring of the ground, and planting corn, glad was that man that could slip from his labor, nay the most honest of them in a general business, would take so much faithful and true pains, in a week, as now he will do in a day.”

Finally, Dale divided his men into companies and permitted some of them to raise crops of their own and tend livestock. Then he allotted smallholdings, three to twelve acres of cleared ground, to those “in the nature of Farmers” who had completed seven years’ service to the Company and were granted their freedom. As long as they provided for their own households and agreed to serve in the local militia when required, they were permitted to work for themselves eleven months of the year; the twelfth month they were obliged to work for the Company in respect of the common good. They were also allowed to grow tobacco or other crops if they maintained two of the three acres under corn. In this way, the colony quickly became self-sufficient: three men, Hamor reported, producing as much as thirty had previously, and the settlers thereby not only able to support themselves but potentially to provision hundreds of new arrivals the Company was planning to send over. By the end of 1614, approximately ninety independent smallholdings had been created in the colony. Dale’s new course was the first tentative acknowledgment by the Company that if settlers were permitted to work partly for their own profit, food production would increase significantly.[3](endnotes.md#en0047en)

Another innovation was to prove equally significant. Much of the population growth that occurred after the colony was relaunched in 1609 had taken place fifty miles upriver from Jamestown at new settlements established by Gates and Dale during the war. Seized from the Appomattocs in revenge for attacks on the English, Dale considered the especially fertile area at the mouth of the Appomattox River an ideal location for the cultivation of corn and development of various industries. Resolved “to possess and plant it,” Dale named it the New Bermudas, or Bermuda Hundred, after the Atlantic islands where the English had been shipwrecked a few years before. In the heartland of the Powhatan chiefdom, the English fortified the area and scores of Company soldiers and laborers moved in. Sometime in 1614, he issued a “patent” (order) that incorporated the settlement and gave inhabitants certain unique rights and extensive common lands in return for their service over the next few years, after which they would be free. The precise terms of the patent no longer exist, but Dale clearly believed the potential of Bermuda Hundred was sufficiently promising that it was worth experimenting with a general grant of privileges to the community as a whole.[4](endnotes.md#en0048en)

The next step, encouraged by Sir Thomas Smythe and other leading Company officers, followed in the spring of 1616. Drawing upon the experience of the early introduction of private land ownership on the island of Bermuda—which as a commercial venture had proven far more successful than Virginia—a declaration was issued in London stating the Company’s intent to allocate Virginia’s extensive lands to settlers and investors both existing and prospective. The English, the Company proclaimed in a gross overstatement, were now “by the Natives liking and consent, in actual possession of a great part of the Country,” and as a consequence were ready to proceed with a general distribution of land. In other words, whether they had once been settled by local peoples or not, investors and adventurers could feel secure in their possession under the terms of the general distribution and new laws that would shortly follow. Those who had been in the colony for at least seven years, together with investors who had previously purchased shares in the venture or planned to buy shares in the future, would receive 50 acres. Investors would get 50 acres for every share with the possibility of another 150 acres per share to come. Land would be made available along both sides of the James River and near established settlements, not in remote places, and property would be granted to individual owners and their heirs under the Company’s authority. The division would be undertaken by “a new Governor with Commissioners and surveyors to be sent from hence” to assure every man received a fair allotment.[5](endnotes.md#en0049en)

For the English, land was the key to unlocking Virginia’s potential. They hoped that extensive grants would attract investors’ and merchants’ interest in the colony both short and long term. The first of a series of large-scale land grants was made by the Company to important individual investors and private associations (“societies of adventurers”) as an immediate measure to improve the Company’s still languishing finances. Terms were vague and extremely generous, reflecting the Company’s desperation for funds and more settlers and investors for the private development of lands. Captain Samuel Argall, appointed deputy governor in the winter of 1616–1617, and his financial backers were assigned 2,400 acres just west of Jamestown for the recruitment of two dozen colonists. A grant of similar size, fifteen miles farther upriver, was awarded to another former deputy governor, George Yeardley, in recognition of his services to the colony and as acknowledgment of a gift of land from the powerful Indian chief Opechancanough of the same year. Both grants were dwarfed by two others made to syndicates of powerful merchants: Smith’s Hundred (named for the Company treasurer, Sir Thomas Smith) and Martin’s Hundred. The first comprised between eighty thousand and one hundred thousand acres (125–150 square miles) along the north bank of the James River from the Chickahominy to the lands of the Weyanocks and was operated as a private joint stock venture that included among its principal investors a roll call of the Company’s leading officers. Martin’s Hundred, also a private joint stock enterprise a few miles downriver from Jamestown, was of similar size and was organized by a group of “ancient adventurers,” the Society of Martin’s Hundred, who had been long associated with the colony and who worked diligently to recruit hundreds of settlers to make the venture profitable.[6](endnotes.md#en0050en)

What is striking about these early “particular” (private) plantations is that their extensive privileges allowed them to be virtually independent of the Virginia Company. Each of them assumed the role of a local unit of administration equal in status to those already established by Dale’s forts and hundreds. They ran their own affairs in England, raised funds, recruited settlers, and furnished themselves with ships and supplies and in return were permitted to produce whatever crops or commodities they wished and trade with whomever and wherever they wanted without any payment to the Company. Across the river from Smith’s Hundred, for example, Captain John Martin, a survivor from Jamestown’s earliest days, acquired an extraordinary grant. On his plantation, named Martin’s Brandon, he governed “in as large and ample manner” as any lord in England. He was given the right of free trade throughout the Chesapeake Bay and along its rivers, including the privilege of holding “convenient markets” on his land that allowed him to enter into commercial relations with anyone he wished.

Commanders of other settlements were also granted great latitude. With the advice of senior members of their companies, they were allowed “to make Orders, Ordinances and Constitutions for the better ordering and directing of their Servants and business Provided they be not Repugnant to the Laws of England.” These settlements were modeled on similar grants in Ireland where huge estates worked by tenants were awarded to individuals and powerful companies of merchants in return for their commitment to settle and improve the land. During a particularly low point in their fortunes, Company leaders believed that such liberal grants were necessary. Yet the ad hoc dispersal of governing authority to particular plantations threatened to undermine the entire basis of government in Virginia, creating the possibility that the colony might disintegrate into a score of quasi-autonomous fiefdoms.[7](endnotes.md#en0051en)

Nonetheless, it was precisely the privileges associated with particular plantations, along with the promise of large amounts of cheap land, that attracted investors who saw great potential in tobacco cultivation. The spectacular growth of tobacco production and resulting profits from markets in London and elsewhere proved another key stimulus to sustained investment and immigration. Instead of a hardscrabble existence producing small amounts of goods of limited value for trade, even smallholders could make a handsome living from high-quality tobacco. In short, it was an ideal poor man’s crop as long as demand was buoyant.

Introduced into England half a century before by mariners who had sailed to Spanish America as privateers, tobacco quickly became fashionable with London’s elite during the 1580s and 1590s. Depending on its quality and condition, leaf imported (legally or otherwise) from Spanish colonies might sell for up to £2 or £4 per pound in London. Despite the expense, smoking spread rapidly from the gentry to the lower classes. According to Barnaby Rich, a contemporary critic of the “nicotian weed,” there was not a groom so base who “comes into an Alehouse to call for his pot but he must have his pipe of Tobacco.” Bermuda led the way, exporting nearly 20,000 pounds in 1617 worth £2,355 on the London market. By contrast, a mere 1,250 pounds were exported from Virginia in 1616 worth just £141; but in the following year, 9,000 pounds were shipped, and in 1618 almost 25,000 pounds valued at nearly £3,000.

Planter Ralph Hamor described with unrestrained enthusiasm “the valuable commodity Tobacco of such esteem in England… which every man may plant, and with the least part of his labor, tend and care will return him both clothes and other necessaries.” In the summer of 1617, Deputy Governor Samuel Argall found Jamestown’s marketplace and streets “and all other spare places planted with Tobacco.” Elsewhere, planters were “dispersed all about” busily attending to their crops. The Company did not approve of the planters’ reliance on tobacco, which it considered likely a short-lived fashion, and encouraged a diversified economy of crops and manufactures, but as more private plantations were established and profits from leaf remained buoyant, Company leaders could at least take satisfaction from the rapidly increasing numbers of settlers who were moving to the colony.[8](endnotes.md#en0052en)

The Company’s willingness to allow individuals or groups of investors to own private property in the colony was a decisive turning point at the end of Jamestown’s first decade. Company leaders were aware, however, that merely dispensing land grants, large or small, was insufficient. Without firm guarantees that their property rights and investments would be protected against arbitrary seizure or embezzlement, settlers, especially those of means, would not be tempted to move to the colony; the risk to themselves and their property would be too great. A fresh course was adopted, therefore, to give assurance that the rule of law would be applied as closely as possible to English traditions and precedent.

KING JAMES I WAS THE FOUNT OF LAW AND “AUTHORITY OF all things” in England and its dependencies. His royal prerogatives included the sovereign right to govern, conducting relations with foreign nations, regulating trade, and declaring war and peace. The king also enjoyed ordinary or limited prerogatives that were constrained by English custom and practice, such as property rights, existing parliamentary statutes, and the common law, known collectively as the “ancient constitution” as handed down from time out of mind. English monarchs were expected to abide by these laws and customs with the advice of their councilors and approbation of Parliament, a form of mixed rule that distinguished Christian kings from tyrants. Significantly, however, these limitations applied only in England, not to overseas colonies. Parliament and the common law had no jurisdiction in Virginia, although the principle of common law would be asserted in the colony after 1618. English lands beyond the seas, historian Ken MacMillan writes, were “ruled by the king alone rather than the king-in-parliament,” an absolute right that would have profound consequences for the colony and ultimately all of British America.[9](endnotes.md#en0053en)

Monarchs were divinely appointed to oversee the well-being of their subjects. In*The Trew Law of Free Monarchies,*James compared his duty to his people to those of a loving father or of the night watchman to their charges, who must “foresee and prevent all dangers, that are likely to fall upon them and to maintain concord, wealth, and civility among them.” The sacred ritual of coronation confirmed the vital bond and reciprocal duties that existed between the monarch and his subjects. “As the Father [because] of his fatherly duty is bound to care for the nourishing, education, and virtuous government of his children; even so is a king bound to care for all his subjects.”*All*James’s subjects included those living overseas in Europe and America. The king made this duty clear in the Virginia Company’s first charter, declaring that

all and every persons being our subjects which shall dwell and inhabit within every or any of the said several Colonies and plantations and every of their children which shall happen to be born within the limits and precincts of the said several Colonies and plantations, shall have and enjoy all liberties Franchises and Immunities within any of our other dominions to all intents and Purposes, as if they had been abiding and born within this our Realm of England or any other of our said Dominions.

For the good of the people, James affirmed, the substance of laws should be as close as possible “to the Common Laws [of] England, and equity thereof.” This clause was repeated nearly word for word in the charter of 1609 and in an abbreviated form in that of 1612.[10](endnotes.md#en0054en)

Yet kingly guarantees of subjects’ rights did not contradict the Virginia Company’s own extensive powers. Initially, only James had the right to make laws for the colony, but in 1609 he delegated authority to the Company’s council in London to establish laws, magistracy, and forms of government that were “fit and necessary” for the colony. The rights of English settlers in Virginia were generally under the protection of the king, but such stipulations did not restrict the Company from employing a broad range of English laws and legal processes as conditions in the colony warranted. England was governed by many different varieties of law—statute, common law, ecclesiastical, manorial, and martial—and the Company could draw upon any of them as needed.

Conciliar government, for example, offered an important precedent that could be readily applied to settlements on the margins of the English Atlantic world. In the late fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, the threat of serious disorder or even rebellion on England’s borders, far removed from the seat of government at Westminster, had persuaded Tudor monarchs to establish special courts to control marcher (lawless) lands. These conciliar courts, historian David Konig has commented, were “virtually beyond accountability,” and wielded enormous powers locally, unchecked by common law procedures such as trial by jury. Ruling councils were similarly adopted by the Company to conduct its affairs in London and Virginia. Even more extreme, as in Ireland where the use of military commissions and martial law brought about years of bloodshed and scorched earth campaigns that had left broad swaths of the country wasted, so in Virginia similar tactics were adopted by successive military commanders in the war against the Powhatans. Authoritarian councils and martial law emerged as the dominant forms of government in Virginia down to 1619.[11](endnotes.md#en0055en)

THE WHOLESALE CHANGES THAT LED TO THE OVERHAUL OF the colony’s laws and government probably coalesced sometime during 1616 following Dale’s return to England. Complaints about the corruption of governors in Virginia such as Captain Samuel Argall and of Company leaders in London, who were more concerned with “their own immoderate gain” than the general welfare of ordinary planters, were sufficiently common by 1617 as to cause serious concern among supporters of the venture that the entire enterprise was at risk. Formulated by an uneasy alliance of Company magnates, Sir Thomas Smythe, alderman Robert Johnson, Sir Robert Rich, Sir Edwin Sandys, and Sir Henry Wriothesley, the Earl of Southampton, the plan came to fruition over the next couple of years.[12](endnotes.md#en0056en)

Sandys was the principal architect of the great reform program. Described by a contemporary as “our Solon and Licurgus” in reference to two legendary Greek lawmakers, he was uniquely qualified for the task. Born in 1561, his father and namesake was one of the most prominent clerics in the newly established Church of England, eventually rising to become the archbishop of York, the second-most powerful position in the Anglican hierarchy. Appropriate to his rank, the young Sandys profited from an impeccable education. At Corpus Christi College, Oxford, he was taught the virtues of civic and Christian humanism that drew upon the wisdom of ancient Greek and Roman philosophers and statesmen as applied to his own times by a host of prominent European intellectuals. At Oxford, he also formed an enduring friendship with the brilliant scholar Richard Hooker and later assisted him with the preparation and publication of what was to become Hooker’s masterpiece,*Of the Laws of Ecclesiastical Polity,*a staunch defense of Anglican faith and practice against Puritan critics. Sandys’s own desire to promote a moderate form of Anglicanism in the Church of England, likely derived from his father and Hooker’s influence, was a vital influence on his ideas for reform in Virginia.[13](endnotes.md#en0057en)

Following the accession of James I in March 1603 and the king’s contentious first session of Parliament the next year, Sandys suddenly burst upon the national scene. Putting his prodigious energy and intellect at the service of Parliament, he quickly established himself as a relentless critic of the king’s political agenda and leader of the opposition in the House of Commons. He was involved in all the major confrontations with James and his ministers over the next twenty years, issues related to the king’s repeated financial demands, challenges to the House of Commons’ privileges, James’s strong desire to bring about a constitutional union between England and Scotland (he styled himself king of Great Britain), and the extent of James’s royal prerogative. Sandys spoke for the majority of the Commons when he opposed monopolies that gave court favorites exclusive privileges that restricted freedom of commerce for everyone else. It was “against the natural right and liberty of the subjects of England,” he declared, “to restrain a [trade] into the hands of some few.” He organized the opposition to the union with Scotland, which earned him the displeasure of the king for blocking a measure close to his heart. Within a few years, he emerged as one of the major spokesmen of the country’s independent gentry by championing the “ancient constitution,” and he voiced the Commons’ concerns about their privileges and the rights of subjects being undermined—“Parliament is no Parliament, if not free.”[14](endnotes.md#en0058en)

***

1619 

**FIGURE 2—**Sir Edwin Sandys was treasurer of the Virginia Company and a leading member of the House of Commons throughout the reign of James I. He was the inspiration for the series of reforms that thoroughly overhauled the Company and the colony after 1619. Courtesy of Mr. Edward Sandys.

***

1619 

Sandys was, at the same time, becoming increasingly influential in the Virginia Company. Owing to his reputation as a fervent defender of free trade and his awareness of trade issues generally, he was sought out by merchants and gentry with significant overseas commercial interests and persuaded to join the king’s council for Virginia in 1607. The translation of the Virginia enterprise into a national undertaking fueled by religious zeal and Christian humanist rhetoric doubtless appealed to Sandys. Over the next several years, the extent of his participation in the colony’s affairs is unclear. He may have assisted with the drafting of the Company’s 1609 charter and likely was one of the leading councilors involved in efforts to raise money throughout the country on behalf of the Company then and thereafter.

During the first half of the 1610s, Sandys had been content to leave the running of the Company to Sir Thomas Smythe and his associates. By the time he eventually took charge in all but name in 1618, however, he had come to the realization that simply responding to particular problems one by one would be insufficient to solve the colony’s most serious challenges. Even if a series of discrete solutions had been possible, the effort would have fallen far short of his overall vision. What he and his supporters proposed was nothing less than the founding of a new type of society in Virginia built on good government, just laws, Protestant morality, and rewards for everyone who invested or settled in the colony. Contrast this with society in England where huge numbers of people lived in dire poverty without regular work and had no land or property of their own. The masterless men and women, vagrants, and idle poor who swarmed to the towns and cities bringing disorder and diseases were notorious for their dissolute ways. Few of Sandys’s contemporaries understood the importance of what the Company under Sandys’s leadership was about to attempt—the reformation of English society in the New World—just as few historians have comprehended the reform program’s singular originality and scope.[15](endnotes.md#en0059en)

Sandys was ably supported by a number of notable courtiers, politicians, and merchants. The Earl of Southampton was a seasoned member of James’s court, a privy councilor, and a major investor in the Virginia Company as well as other overseas ventures, although he is best remembered today as William Shakespeare’s patron and possible lover. He remained a steadfast ally of Sandys throughout the period, even when Sandys fell out of favor with the king, and succeeded him as treasurer in 1620. John Ferrar and Nicholas Ferrar were equally faithful lieutenants of Sandys as well as the administrative workhorses of the Company. Sons of a wealthy London merchant who had made a fortune in the privateering war against Spain, they would both serve as deputy treasurer and were zealous supporters of the entire reform program, especially the commitment to convert the Powhatans to Christianity and to found a Christian commonwealth. These four men, together with Sir William, Lord Cavendish, and Sir John Danvers, both experienced parliamentarians, were the leading advocates for a commonwealth in Virginia that emphasized the rule of law and consent of the governed. They were the first founders of representative government in America.[16](endnotes.md#en0060en)

THE MAJOR REFORMS THAT TOOK PLACE IN 1619 WERE EMBRACED in a series of commissions and instructions issued by the Company to the new governor, Sir George Yeardley. In mid-November 1618, he was ordered to establish a “laudable form of government by Magistracy and just Laws… for the happy guiding and governing of the people.” Subsequently known as the “great Charter,” the instructions were designed broadly to restrain arbitrary rule and to establish a government founded firmly on the rule of law. The immediate objective, however, was more modest and focused on a variety of serious practical problems that required Yeardley’s immediate attention. He was to raise provisions for the hundreds of new colonists who would shortly arrive, lay out public lands to support the colony’s principal officers, announce the long-awaited distribution of land to “ancient planters” (those who had arrived in Virginia before April 1616), and apportion land to newcomers and shareholders. The entire apparatus for dispensing, confirming, and recording land grants was to be thoroughly overhauled to prevent a repetition of abuses of the previous two years when large land grants had been made to individuals favored by former deputy governor Argall with little reference to the Company. Yeardley was also instructed to confirm legitimate individual and Company land grants to underline the Company’s determination to protect private property.[17](endnotes.md#en0061en)

**FIGURE 3—**English settlements in Virginia in 1619. Drawn by Jamie May.

Ensuring orderly settlement along the James River valley and establishing local government were closely related priorities. Yeardley acted quickly to organize dispersed settlements into four new jurisdictional units termed “Cities or Burroughs”: Jamestown, Charles City, and Henrico upriver and Kecoughtan, later Elizabeth City, at the mouth of the James River.

As largely self-governing civic bodies, the boroughs would enable the establishment of law and order guided by directives handed down by the Company via the governor, council of state, and the General Assembly. Although the great charter is frustratingly vague about the form the boroughs’ governing bodies would take, we can surmise that the Company had in mind that each would have a local council similar to those of incorporated (chartered) towns in England led by captains or chief officers. They were to be responsible, among other duties, for overseeing the public lands, encouraging the Company’s economic plans, and maintaining lists of the living and the dead as well as marriages and christenings. Boroughs and particular plantations would have their own monthly courts for “all small and petty matters” and would be responsible for the enfranchisement of male landowners, tenants, and servants to allow them to vote for their local representatives to sit in the General Assembly. Existing and planned particular plantations were granted similar privileges but with provisions that severely limited the generous terms they had been formerly granted, which were now viewed as highly detrimental to the welfare of the colony. Yeardley was to ensure that these private plantations were part of “one body corporate and live under Equal and like Law and orders with the rest of the Colony.” By this highly significant measure, the potentially corrosive drift of the colony’s government toward multiple proprietary and independent jurisdictions was brought to an abrupt halt. There would now be one civic authority at Jamestown, governing over the four corporations and the particular plantations.[18](endnotes.md#en0062en)

Little indication is given in Yeardley’s commissions and instructions of the broader thinking that informed the new direction taken by the Company. However, a letter of early December 1618 written by “R. F.,” possibly Richard Ferrar, the youngest brother of John and Nicholas, provides a unique insight into Sandys’s and his associates’ far-reaching ambitions.

R. F.’s main purpose in penning his letter was to assure the recipient, also anonymous, that martial law and the largely unrestricted powers of the governor would be brought to an end and therefore that future investments in the colony would be safe. “[M]atters are no more to be carried [on] haphazardly [or arbitrarily] in a Marshalls court,” he wrote, “or after the uncertain and unlimited humor of one man but there is now a council of estate erected to assist and advise the governor in all his courses.” All disputes, whether civil or criminal, were to be judged and resolved according to “our laws and customs here in England,” and the Company had devised many “excellent laws and Ordinances,” designed specifically to meet the needs of the colony. These laws, R. F. underlined, do not “like the traditions of the Pharisees lay heavy burthens [taxes or impositions] upon the people, but contrariwise do bring them liberty and reward,” and were to be expressly set down so that every person would know what they could trust and “what he or she may forever challenge as their right.”

The care the Company accorded to settlers’ rights was given further emphasis in one of R. F.’s most revealing passages, spelling out what the rule of law meant as applied to Virginia:

Lastly they [the laws] set down what lands or immunities every person is presently to enjoy, according to their merit and quality, and what duties they are tied to, besides many other excellent particulars too long here to write, a copy whereof I will provide you against your coming up to London the next term. And these laws and ordinances are not to be chested or hidden like a candle under a bushel,*but in form of a Magna Charta*[my italics] to be published to the whole colony, to the end every particular person though never so mean, may both for his own right challenge it and in case he be at any time wronged, though by the best of the country, he may have law to allege for his speedy remedy.

It was a remarkable promise that decisively addressed the wrongs of the past and set a bold course for the future. The rights and responsibilities of settlers were to be explicit, and all, from the lowest to the highest, would have the same standing before the law. As in the case “of a Magna Charta,” the new laws and ordinances would be published throughout the colony to make sure everyone knew their rights and would be able to appeal for justice should they have cause.[19](endnotes.md#en0063en)

TWO OTHER MAJOR INNOVATIONS OF 1619 THAT WOULD HAVE enduring significance were the establishment of the council of state and a General Assembly. A governor’s council was not new; it had first been created in 1609 to support Lord De La Warr’s administration but was merely an advisory body and councilors served at his pleasure, and De La Warr had the authority to appoint and dismiss them as he wished. Members of the new council of state, by contrast, were appointed by the Company to govern in partnership with the governor, the latter being first among equals. Decisions were taken by a majority vote, and if a tie resulted, the governor would cast the deciding vote. Councilors were expected to assist the governor in encouraging settlers to maintain “Justice and Christian Conversation among themselves” and advance the “honor and service of almighty God” by seeking ways to promote the Anglican faith among Indian peoples. Together with the governor, they comprised the colony’s superior court, named variously the Quarter or General Court.

The significance of the General Court, legal historian Paul Halliday points out, has been overshadowed by the General Assembly but was just as important, if not more so, in establishing new laws and precedent. Owing to the volume of business, monthly courts as well as quarterly sessions were held to oversee the application of the colony’s laws as the council created them and to ensure the efficient upkeep of borough and particular plantations’ vital records that would be sent to the Company on a regular basis. In regard to the former, the governor and his councilors serving as judges in the General Court borrowed freely from a wide variety of English jurisprudence. Given its broad range of judicial, legislative, and executive functions, it is hardly surprising that the council became the backbone of successive colonial administrations, a powerful and enduring institution by which daily supervision of Virginia’s affairs was maintained and promoted. Yet the concentration of power in the hands of a minority of wealthy planter-merchants, together with the lack of oversight from English central courts, could encourage the exercise of “naked self-interest” on the part of councilors in formulating a new “customary law” for Virginia, especially in regard to processes governing land distribution and terms of servant and slave labor.[20](endnotes.md#en0064en)

The second of the two “Supreme Councils” was the General Assembly. R. F. described it as “a general council” that was to convene annually or more frequently if circumstances required it. For some Company leaders, the term*council*may have been closer to the form and function they initially had in mind, corresponding to the governing courts in London where shareholders could have a say in the Company’s affairs and vote on important issues; none of the leaders wished to promote “popular government” in Virginia or weaken their control over the colony. Even so, there was an obvious distinction between the Company’s courts, in effect meetings of stockholders, and the General Assembly, which was an elected body that represented the settlers. By endowing the people with their own governing assembly, the Company further strengthened the colony’s emerging commonwealth and also its ties to the sovereign authority in England. “The highly symbolic creation of a Virginia parliament,” Alexander Haskell comments, “established the*corpus mysticum*in which the king’s own sovereign will was theoretically bound” and was an explicit appeal to principles of England’s “ancient constitution” in the colony. Just as in the mother country the king-in-parliament was the ultimate expression of sovereignty, so in Virginia the creation of a parliament-like representative body confirmed the colony’s conformity with England’s traditional balance of powers between monarchy, aristocracy, and democracy.[21](endnotes.md#en0065en)

The assembly was unquestionably a representative body. In late June 1619, Sir George Yeardley sent writs to the colony’s corporations, hundreds, and private plantations ordering the selection of two “sufficient” men from each jurisdiction to be decided by male freeholders and tenants by a “plurality of voices.” Called*burgesses,*in acknowledgment of their role as representatives of the newly founded boroughs, they were to join the governor and his council in a single body at Jamestown. Following the maxim that “every man will more willingly obey laws to which he hath yielded his consent,” planters would henceforth be able to participate in government and promote measures for their own and the general good. Settlers, the leadership believed, could not object to Company policies if they were given an opportunity to consider them by way of their representatives’ deliberations in the assembly.

The beginning of self-government in the form of the General Assembly was one of the most important political events to take place in British America before the Revolution, and yet its founding role in this country’s democratic experiment is almost completely overlooked.[22](endnotes.md#en0066en) Convened on Friday, July 30, 1619, the assembly met in the heat and humidity of a typical Virginia summer. Thirty men gathered in the newly built church at Jamestown: Governor Yeardley, his four councilors—Samuel Maycock, Captain Nathaniel Powell, John Rolfe, and the secretary of the colony, John Pory—and twenty-two burgesses representing the four corporations and seven private plantations. Yeardley acted in the capacity of president, overseeing deliberations and exercising the powers of veto, adjournment, and dissolution. He probably selected Pory for the office of speaker before the assembly convened and the appointment was confirmed before proceedings got under way. How Pory came to be styled speaker is uncertain. He may have proposed the title himself to distinguish his role from his more general duties as the colony’s secretary, although his responsibilities in the assembly were almost entirely clerical. Without doubt, his adopted title of speaker was derived from the House of Commons in which Pory had sat as a member for Bridgwater, Somerset, between 1605 and 1611. The assemblymen adopted English parliamentary procedures from the start, determined not be perceived in London as a mere local council on the fringes of the English-speaking world.[23](endnotes.md#en0067en)

Before business commenced, acknowledging that “men’s affairs do little prosper where God’s service is neglected,” the assembly gathered in prayer led by the Reverend Richard Bucke, minister of Jamestown, then they moved to the nave where they were called upon one by one to swear an oath of allegiance to the king. Afterward, they formally entered “the assembly” and took their seats. The governor took his place in the center of the chancel, his councilors on either side of him, and beyond them the burgesses sat in the choir.

**FIGURE 4—**The first General Assembly convened in Jamestown’s wooden church on July 30, 1619. The painting shows governor Sir George Yeardley and members of his council seated in the chancel with the Reverend Richard Bucke on his right and the sergeant at arms, Thomas Pierse, on his left. Secretary John Pory and clerk of the assembly John Twine are seated at the table. The first row of the burgesses can just be seen on the far left of the painting. Sidney King, courtesy of Preservation Virginia.

In a clear signal of the gravity with which the assembly took its responsibilities, after reading aloud the burgesses’ names, Pory objected to the inclusion of two of its members, Captain John Ward and Lieutenant John Gibbs of Ward’s plantation, on the grounds that Ward had not received permission from the Virginia Company to settle his plantation. Captain Ward and Gibbs were required to remove themselves while the matter was deliberated. Due consideration being given to Ward’s personal investment in the colony, the value of his trade in bringing provisions to the colony, and, tellingly, Yeardley’s instructions that stipulated two burgesses were to be admitted for every plantation “without restraint or exception,” the two men were given the opportunity to take their seats on condition that Ward registered his land with the Company before the next assembly, to which he agreed. Accordingly, the assembly gave its approval by general voice, and Ward and Gibbs were permitted “to make up their number and to sit among them.”[24](endnotes.md#en0068en)

Captain John Martin’s two burgesses were not so fortunate. Yeardley himself challenged their right to be seated on the basis that a clause in the Martin’s Brandon plantation patent exempted those living there “from that equality and uniformity of laws and orders which the great charter says are to extend over the whole Colony.” Captain Martin’s patent gave him broad powers to “govern and command all such person or persons as at this time he shall carry over with him, or that shall be sent him hereafter, free from any command of the Colony.”

Yeardley’s public challenge in front of the entire assembly was likely premeditated, the first salvo in what would turn out to be a lengthy process by the Company to curb the terms of Martin’s grant. Yeardley argued that by virtue of his patent, Martin, his deputies, and people were not bound by any laws passed by the assembly for the good of the colony, and they “might deride the whole company [assembly] and choose whether they would obey the same or no.” If this was so, then Martin’s patent would in effect be “of a higher condition, and of greater force then any act of the General Assembly”; a state of affairs that could not be tolerated. Pory’s report of the proceedings noted that at this point the “Court” (a reminder that the assembly functioned as a court as well as a deliberative and lawmaking body) ordered that Martin’s deputies should withdraw until such time as Martin made a personal appearance before them. If Martin appeared, however, he would not be permitted to argue his case; the decision had already been made, probably well before the assembly met. If Martin was willing to give up the offending clause, his two burgesses would be admitted, but if not, Pory recorded in remarkably uncompromising language, the two representatives would be “utterly excluded, as being spies, rather than loyal Burgesses.”

Yeardley, with the Company’s blessing, had asserted the primacy of the rule of law over all settlers in the colony. Martin, if he insisted on maintaining the terms of his original grant, would be considered outside the community, incapable of representation because he refused to consent to decisions taken on behalf of the community. He was in effect given a stark choice: acknowledge the authority of the assembly or be debarred.

The governor, however, was not content to leave it there. To do so would present another risk. If Martin opted to adhere to the letter of his grant and interpret his plantation as an independent entity outside the jurisdiction of the governor, council, or assembly, his independence might jeopardize the welfare of settlers throughout the colony as a whole. In what appears as a second staged set piece, a complaint was brought against Martin for his role in an incident that took place in the Chesapeake Bay involving a number of Indians. Martin had sent a shallop to trade for corn under the command of Ensign James Harrison, which had encountered a canoe coming out of a creek. The Indians had refused to trade, and Harrison had ordered his men to board the canoe and take the corn by force, measuring out the corn with a basket carried for that purpose and giving the Indians copper beads “and other trucking stuff” (small trade goods) in return. The story was confirmed by Thomas Davis, ironically one of the burgesses of Martin’s Brandon recently expelled, and by word from Opechancanough to the governor saying that the Indians had appealed to him.

In response, the assembly ordered Martin to appear before them to answer the accusation and to give security that “his people” would not commit any further such outrages. Again, the reason was made clear: “because such outrages as this might breed danger and loss of life to others of the Colony which should have leave to trade in the bay hereafter, and for prevention of like violence against the Indians in time to come.” In sum, Martin and his men could not do as they pleased. The interpretation secured by Yeardley from the assembly further restricted Martin’s freedoms by attaching the limitation to his grant that any actions he or his men undertook could not jeopardize other settlers or Indian peoples. This decision had been rendered not by executive fiat but in open debate in the assembly; its broad representative basis gave sanction to the legitimacy of laws passed for the common good.

The measures taken against Captain Martin were in many ways the result of a growing dissatisfaction among major officeholders within the Company. Sir Edwin Sandys and his supporters were frustrated by the lack of accountability and transparency of the Company’s leaders, led by Sir Thomas Smythe, who had been in charge of the colony since its beginning. Sandys was appalled by the financial losses of the previous decade and the highly preferential treatment that influential private investors such as Martin had enjoyed during Smythe’s tenure. Little wonder that a significant component of the reforms adopted in 1618 and 1619 took the form of efforts to reverse such ill-advised decisions of prior years. If Martin’s privileges could be challenged successfully, then other grandees with similar generous grants would also fall into line.

The principle was driven home a couple of days later on August 2 when Captain Martin appeared at the bar of the assembly to answer the questions put to him. Regarding the first, whether he would voluntarily give up the special privileges contained in his patent, he replied he would not. The assembly then resolved that the burgesses for Martin’s Brandon should not be seated. In answer to the second question, whether he would agree to give security to the governor for the good behavior of his men toward Indian peoples when trading in the bay, he confirmed he would. At that, returning to the first issue, the assembly and speaker agreed that they should seek guidance from the Company and council in London about the offending clause in Martin’s patent, and in particular how they were to reconcile the preferential treatment enjoyed by Martin with the principle expressed toward the conclusion of the great charter that all grants should be made equally so that “partiality… may be avoided.” The assembly humbly beseeched the Company to consider and remove any such hindrances to the equality of laws and orders extending throughout the colony that might “divert out of the true course the free and public current of Justice.”

By employing the assembly to define the limits of Martin’s rights, Yeardley posted an unambiguous message: that whatever the circumstances before 1619, grandees like Martin were now expected to follow “the general form of government as all others did.” In hindsight, July 30 and August 2 turned out to be two of the most important days of Yeardley’s entire governorship; he had laid down the principle of the rule of law and secured the support of the assembly to enforce it.[25](endnotes.md#en0069en)

Martin’s case involving Ensign Harrison and the confrontation with Indians in the Chesapeake Bay also raised another significant issue: Whose law? Following the death of Wahunsonacock, Opitchapam (also known as Itoyatin) had formally succeeded as the great chief, but his kinsman Opechancanough had assumed the role de facto even when Wahunsonacock was still alive, and it was to him that the Indians wronged by Harrison turned for help. Opechancanough sent a message to Governor Yeardley saying that the Indians had appealed to him to “procure them justice,” and Yeardley had duly obliged by bringing Martin to judgment before the assembly. The incident and the manner by which the governor and chief dealt with it reveal a clear understanding of discreet jurisdictions and practices. Rule of law, as far as the English were concerned, applied only to those areas settled by the English and legitimized by the Company—what became known later as “English ground in America.” Settlers were well aware that the Indian peoples had their own laws and codes of behavior that governed their actions, social relations, and communities. Where gray areas existed, such as serious transgressions that occurred in places outside the direct jurisdiction of either the English or the Powhatans, or when one people wronged the other, then the governor and the great chief were obliged to act together, dealing with the offenders according to their own laws as suited the circumstances.[26](endnotes.md#en0070en)

In comparison to the drama of the assembly’s assertion of the rule of law, much of the other business of the meeting took a more sedate tone. On July 30, following a briefing that detailed the purposes of the assembly, Pory read aloud the Company’s commissions that established the council of state and the General Assembly and then the great charter, or “commission of privileges,” together with the orders and laws sent by the Company with Yeardley. Adopting a parliamentary procedure, he divided members into two committees of eight to undertake a review of the great charter and laws, explaining in a later report that the assembly’s desire to examine the charter and laws was not out of any disrespect for the Virginia Company’s diligence in perfecting the measures “but only in case we should find anything not perfectly squaring with the state of this Colony or any law which did press or bind too hard, that we might by way of humble petition, seek to have it redressed, especially,” Pory added weightily, “because this Great Charter is to bind us and our heirs forever.”

Four principal tasks were put before the assemblymen: they were to review the charter, laws, and privileges; to recommend which of the instructions granted to Sir George and two previous governors, Lord De La Warr and Captain Argall, might be conveniently drawn up into laws; to consider private issues brought before the assembly; and finally, to determine what petitions should be drafted and sent to the Company.

The following day, recommendations of the assembly were framed into a series of petitions to be presented to the treasurer, council, and Company in England. As might have been anticipated, many of the proposed revisions addressed safeguarding the rights of “ancient planters.” The assemblymen suggested changes related to improving the use and administration of Company lands, sending more tenants and workmen, and facilitating the efficient collection of planters’ rents. They also suggested changing “the savage name” of Kecoughtan to Elizabeth City. Given “these doubtful times between us and the Indians,” the assembly proposed that the Company’s requirement of ten miles between particular plantations (to avoid boundary disputes) was too great and advised that in the interests of strength and security they should be drawn closer together.[27](endnotes.md#en0071en)

The assembly then proceeded to consider the instructions from the Company that been directed to Yeardley and two previous governors. Pory turned once again to the two committees for recommendations about how best to convert them into laws, requiring the first to study the general instructions and the second particular instructions. Since the next day was a Sunday, the committees were asked to report to the assembly on Monday, August 2. Taken together, their recommendations covered the entire range of the colony’s affairs: commercial and economic arrangements for the colony as a whole—setting the price of tobacco, regulating prices and accounts of the Company store and trade, restricting the trading privileges of particular plantations, and regulating trading voyages in the bay.

Further regulations were passed requiring the enforcement of contracts with tradesmen, tenants, and servants, and the production of a range of crops such as corn, hemp, silk, flax, vines, and mulberry trees was encouraged or required. In addition, laws were recommended to prohibit idleness, gaming, drunkenness, and “excess in apparel.” Moral offenses—failure to attend divine service upon the Sabbath, inveterate swearing, and “incontinency” such as whoredom or “dishonest company keeping with women”—were to be punished by ministers and churchwardens, as was the practice in England. Settlers were advised also on relations with the Powhatans: maintaining the peace and promoting “the Conversion of the Indians to Christian Religion.” Strict laws were passed banning settlers from providing firearms or other weapons to the Indians upon pain of being declared a traitor to the colony and hanged if proven guilty.

The final business of the assembly, acting as a court, was to consider grievances brought by individual or groups of settlers. The inhabitants of Argall’s Town petitioned to be released from £650 owed to Captains Argall and William Powell, the latter one of the burgesses of James City, for three thousand acres of land and the building of houses that the petitioners believed should have been paid for by Argall. The same William Powell accused one of his servants, Thomas Garnet, of malicious behavior in refusing to work, abusing his master and mistress, drunkenness, theft, and treachery in seeking to discredit Powell in the eyes of the governor and council. Garnet was sentenced to have his ears nailed to the town’s pillory for the next three days and to be publicly whipped each day. Punishment for the neglect of his work was referred to the colony’s council of state. John Rolfe then brought forward a complaint against Captain Martin claiming that Martin had behaved toward him in an “unseemly” and unfair manner and had accused him of “certain things” for which he was not to blame. Martin had also been disparaging about the government, which in Rolfe’s opinion was the “most temperate and just that ever was in this country.” Martin, it seems, had spoken his mind to Rolfe about his treatment by the assembly the previous day. The case was also referred to the council.

Martin was not the only one to cast aspersions on Yeardley’s new government. The final case brought before the assembly for judgment was potentially far more serious. Robert Poole was an ancient planter who had arrived in Virginia with his father and brother in 1611. He had learned Algonquian and become one of the colony’s interpreters. In that capacity, he had been present at Opechancanough’s “court” when another interpreter, Captain Henry Spelman, had allegedly spoken “irreverently and maliciously” about the governor. Spelman denied much of what Poole recounted but confessed that he had told Opechancanough that within a year another governor would be sent to the colony “greater than this that now is in place.” By this and other reports, the assembly concluded, Spelman had “alienated the mind of Opechancanough from this present governor, and brought him in much disesteem, both with Opechancanough and the Indians, and the whole Colony in danger of their slippery designs.” Belittling the governor to the great chief of the Powhatans alone could have been viewed as treasonous and therefore sufficient to warrant the death penalty, but the assembly took a lenient view, aware that only one witness had brought the allegations and perhaps in acknowledgment of Spelman’s long experience as an Indian interpreter. He was stripped of his rank of captain and bound for seven years to serve the colony as an interpreter for the governor, a sentence he did not accept gracefully. Pory reported that Spelman “as one that had in him more of the Savage then of the Christian, muttered certain words to himself neither showing remorse for his offenses, nor yet any thankfulness to the assembly for their so favorable censure.”[28](endnotes.md#en0072en)

Spelman’s case, and to some degree Martin’s, were echoes of the growing fissures within the Virginia Company’s leadership that found their way into the assembly’s deliberations. Sir Thomas Smythe had been indignant of his treatment by the Sandys group, having his accounts inspected and his integrity implicitly questioned in council meetings from 1616 onward. Although he had decided to voluntarily resign from the leadership of the Company, he had done so only under pressure from Sandys and his associates and felt that his own strenuous efforts to support the Company during the difficult times of the previous decade had been given insufficient credit. He was scathing about Sir George Yeardley’s elevation to a knighthood and believed Yeardley was wholly unworthy of the honor. Compared to Lord De La Warr, a nobleman of impeccable lineage and repute, Smythe pointed to Yeardley’s modest middle-class origins and his humble background as a soldier. The contemporary correspondent John Chamberlain described Yeardley as “a mean fellow” who after his knighthood paraded up and down the streets of London “in extraordinary bravery [ostentation], with fourteen or fifteen fair liveries [servants] after him.” Smythe’s lack of confidence in him together with initial hostility from leading men at Jamestown formerly close to Argall very nearly persuaded Yeardley to step down during his first few months in the colony.[29](endnotes.md#en0073en)

Yet in many respects personal rivalries in London and Jamestown were symptoms of a deeper problem. Sandys and his supporters embraced the rule of law as the sine qua non of the thorough-going reformation of society that would follow; one that involved the evolution of corporate structures and accompanying civic virtues under the umbrella of an inclusive Christian commonwealth. But it was not a view shared by other powerful leaders of the Company such as Smythe or Sir Robert Rich, the newly minted Earl of Warwick, who considered the plan utterly impractical. Smythe favored a trading venture that maximized profits for the Company from goods produced in the colony and commodities sent from England in exchange. As long as settlers were productive and the colony stable, he was not especially concerned about the form society took. For the Earl of Warwick, a militant Puritan and passionate adversary of the Spanish, American colonies offered an ideal opportunity to raid Spanish possessions and shipping from English-controlled islands such as Bermuda or mainland colonies such as Virginia. He supported colonization as much for the creation of privateering bases as enduring settlements.[30](endnotes.md#en0074en)

On August 4, Yeardley called an abrupt halt to the assembly’s proceedings, citing the oppressive heat (one burgess, Walter Shelley, had already died during the meeting). He was likely pleased with the outcome even if the assembly was able to sit for only six days. Aided by the unflagging labors of John Pory, he had established a commitment to just laws and the orderly management of the colony’s affairs. Free male settlers had followed the governor’s instructions to elect their representatives from the corporations and private plantations, and the assembly had avoided any major conflicts between the governor and his council on the one hand and the burgesses on the other. They had sat together as one body and worked together to confirm and expand upon the laws propounded by the Company. With the exception of the Martin and Spelman cases, the business of the assembly had aroused little controversy among its members. The assembly concluded its work with the plea that it should be permitted to enforce the laws agreed upon until such time as the Company was able to review them and that the Company would consider implementing their promise as soon as convenient to permit the assembly “to allow or disallow of their orders of Court [Company], as his Majesty has given them power to allow or to reject our laws,” a clear indication that the assembly wished to expand its powers. Yeardley then prorogued the assembly until March 1 of the following year.[31](endnotes.md#en0075en)

HIGHLY GRATIFIED BY NEWS OF THE ASSEMBLY’S ACCOMPLISHMENTS, the Company published a glowing description of the colony in June 1620 that declared “the Colony begins now to have the face and fashion of an orderly State, and such as is likely to grow and prosper.” As a capstone, Company leaders committed themselves to compiling a book of standing laws and orders that would be regularly updated to include new legislation as well as a second book that would “reduce into a compendious and orderly form in writing, the Laws of*England*proper for the use” of colonists. This would be first submitted to the king for his review and approval, “it being not fit that his Majesty’s Subjects should be governed by any other Laws, then such as receive the influence of their life from him,” a reminder that the colony’s existence was grounded firmly upon the sovereign’s grace and authority.

The first assembly did not establish a fully fledged form of common law in the colony; the institutions that underpinned the common law in England, such as the petty courts and Quarter Sessions of English counties, simply did not exist in Virginia. Nonetheless, the great charter and new laws passed by the assembly brought the colony into much greater conformity with legal practice in the mother country. Neither did the General Assembly initiate a recognizably modern democracy (which would have been unthinkable at this time), but it most certainly heralded a broadly representative form of government based on an extraordinarily wide male franchise and the consent of the governed.[32](endnotes.md#en0076en)

The reforms of 1619 were by any measure an extraordinary achievement. Within eighteen months, the arbitrary government and harsh punishments that had stigmatized years of military rule had been left behind, widespread private property established, and the colony’s laws and local government thoroughly overhauled. The complex layers of jurisdictions, courts, and laws that had evolved across half a millennium in England had been reduced to a simple set of formulas that were (for the most part) transparent to colonists. Yet despite these conspicuous successes, the future of the colony continued to be uncertain. Serious divisions had emerged within the Company’s leadership, James I remained an unreliable ally, and Spain continued to contest the very legitimacy of the colony. Doubts had been raised indirectly in the assembly about Yeardley’s fitness for office, and fears were voiced that his government might be too mild for those settlers “whom unwanted [unlooked for] liberty has made insolent and not to know themselves,” or their place. Members of the assembly urged the Company to accept their revised laws in part to enable them to maintain control over ordinary planters who had tasted the heady fruits of self-government and who would be bitterly disappointed if their efforts came to nothing. In the peculiar conditions of England’s first enduring colony, fashioning a satisfactory balance of powers and rights between the sovereign, governing classes, and the people would prove the most intractable problem colonial officials and settlers would face. The introduction of the great charter and General Assembly represented only a beginning.[33](endnotes.md#en0077en)