---
title: "Chapter Six: Inequality and Freedom"
type: "reading"
book: "1619: Jamestown and the Forging of American Democracy"
author: "James Horn"
chapter_num: 6
source: "Horn, James - 1619- Jamestown and the Forging of American Democracy.epub"
date_added: 2026-05-25
tags:
  - hist_21103
  - reading
  - 1619
---

1619 

# [*Six*](toc.xhtml#toc-chapter010)

 

# [Inequality and Freedom](toc.xhtml#toc-chapter010)

 

My Master Atkins has sold me for £15 like a damned slave.*—Thomas Best (1623)*Magna Charta… will have no sovereign.*—Sir Edward Coke (1628)*The foundation of English liberty, and of all free government, is a right in the people to participate in their legislative council.*—First Continental Congress (1774)*HOW BEST TO CONTAIN THE INFLUENCE OF OVERMIGHTY subjects, the greedy “caterpillars of the commonweal,” was a question that had faced free societies from ancient times onward. For Company and royal officials alike, the challenge posed by the grandees of Virginia was all the more intractable given the colony’s remoteness from central government in London and the rapid concentration of political power in wealthy planters’ hands. Over the next century and a half, colonial elites would jealously protect their political privileges and independence, which they lauded in terms of traditional English freedoms. Yet at the same time, the majority of Virginia’s population—poor tenant farmers, white servants, and enslaved Africans—found themselves mired in deep-rooted poverty with little or no hope of joining the ranks of the middling and wealthy. The escalating demand for labor made the recruitment of poor, mostly young, male laborers a necessity that in turn created a highly unbalanced society. A census ordered by crown officials in 1625 revealed that 70 percent of the adult population of English settlements was made up of servants and enslaved Africans. For them, the sheer struggle for survival was all-consuming. Stark inequality soon emerged as one of the principal characteristics of the colony and had a lasting influence.[1](endnotes.md#en0177en)

 

SIR EDWIN SANDYS AND HIS SUPPORTERS HAD BEEN ACUTELY aware of the possible exploitation of the poor and vulnerable by rich planters in Virginia. The whole point of the reforms of 1619 was to end the rapacious activities of governors such as Captain Samuel Argall, charged openly by Nicholas Ferrar of tolerating “Rapines, extortions, and oppressions.” During the government of Sir Thomas Smythe and Argall, settlers had been plundered mercilessly, Ferrar wrote, and corruption at the highest levels of the Company was rife. Even the wealthy and influential occasionally fell afoul of Argall and his powerful backers in London, who were concerned more with their own private gain than the public good. After Lord De La Warr’s death at sea in the summer of 1618, lawsuits regarding the subsequent embezzlement of his goods and servants worth thousands of pounds ended up in the king’s courts for years. Captain Edward Brewster, who spoke up against Argall in the matter, was condemned to death for his opposition by a martial court convened by Argall in Jamestown. Goods sent by the Company were routinely pillaged by the governor and his coterie so that the “Colony was cheated and robbed.” For Sandys, the arbitrary government of Virginia and plundering of the public store was the very antithesis of a commonwealth, which persuaded him that nothing less than root and branch changes to the management of the Company were necessary to save the colony.[2](endnotes.md#en0178en)

 

Critical to the effort to establish the new state that Sandys and the Company had in mind was the appointment of virtuous and effective governors who would implement the necessary reforms. Commonwealths could not flourish without just rulers and honorable magistrates. The governor and his principal officers were the agents of change in Virginia for policies formulated by Sandys, his deputies, and the Company’s council in London. But despite an elaborate system of oversight to ensure regular reports and compliance with Company plans, evidenced by the enormous volume of papers generated by the leadership in this period, serious difficulties arose. Some were predictable and largely unavoidable. Sheer distance and the vagaries of winds and weather disrupted trade and communications. Crossing thousands of miles of ocean was hazardous: ships were unseaworthy, sickness might break out, and navigation was sometimes uncertain. Similarly, conditions in the colony might periodically be unsuited for the arrival of hundreds of settlers owing to the season, “pestilence,” lack of adequate food, or places for them to lodge. These were challenges all colonizers faced, whether Spanish, French, or English, but the Virginia Company was the first English enterprise to attempt mass transportation of settlers and the creation of a transplanted English society in America. In addition, expectations in London of what should have been achieved were often wildly unrealistic, as successive governors from Sir George Yeardley onward frequently pointed out.

 

Invariably, the poor suffered most. Less than six months after Sandys took over governing the Company, John Pory sent an enthusiastic letter to England reporting the rapid progress of the colony. After first highlighting tobacco as the planters’ primary source of wealth, he immediately corrected himself: “Our principal wealth, (I should have said) consists in servants.” To the wealthy and well placed, it quickly became apparent that the more servants they could command, the more money could be made. All the major officeholders requested servants, ostensibly to support the cost of their office but in reality to provide them with handsome incomes.

 

Colony officials soon realized that trafficking in servants was as lucrative as selling goods imported from England. John Rolfe remarked that there had been “many complaints against the Governors, Captains, and Officers in Virginia, for buying and selling men and boys.” Most of the Company tenants who arrived on the*Bona Nova*in November 1619, for example, were rented out for a year to wealthy planters such as Samuel Mathews instead of being put to work on Company (public) lands as originally intended. Company leaders later complained that whereas it had been claimed that placing the men “with old planters” was for their health and to learn tobacco husbandry, they had been “so unmercifully used that it was the greatest cause of our Tenants discontent.” Company tenants and “lawful servants” had been forced to work for planters or had had their contracts altered without their consent, which in England, Rolfe commented, would have been held “a thing most intolerable.”

 

Reports of wrongdoing and the poor treatment of servants severely tarnished the reputation of the colony. In the spring of 1620, a story circulating in Plymouth, England, reported that nine hundred settlers had died in the previous twelve months and that “the people are used with more slavery than if they were under the Turk.” Alderman Robert Johnson, one of Sandys’s archrivals closely associated with Sir Thomas Smythe, calculated that between April 1619 and March 1622 some three thousand people had died for “want of houses, pestering [pestilent] ships, shortness and badness of food.”

 

Most servants’ circumstances became even more desperate after the Indian massacre of 1622 and harrowing winter that followed. Richard Frethorne arrived at Martin’s Hundred at a particularly bad time early in 1623. Shortly after arrival, he wrote back to his parish minister in England begging for food and clothes: “I am in a most miserable and pitiful Case [state], for want of meat and want of clothes.” He asked his minister to speak to his parishioners to raise a small donation for clothes and food and ended with a plea “to be freed out of this Egypt.” A few weeks later, he wrote to his parents describing scurvy and the “bloody flux” (dysentery) and shortage of provisions: “Since I came out of the ship, I never ate anything but peas and loblolly (that is water gruel).” It would be “most pitiful if you did know as much as I, when people cry out day, and night, Oh that they were in England without their limbs and would not care to lose any limb to be in England again, yea though they beg from door to door.” If “you love or respect me as your Child, release me from this bondage, and save my life,” he pleaded. Whether his parents were able to save him is unknown, but more likely he died in the summer or fall. Thomas Nicolls, a surveyor who worked at Martin’s Hundred, complained that “lying Virginians” who told misleadingly optimistic stories about prospects in Virginia had encouraged many servants to adventure themselves. They were the “chief causers of their [the servants’] deaths,” Nicolls charged, who went to their graves “cursing them most bitterly who sent them out.” He also died that year.[3](endnotes.md#en0179en)

 

SOCIAL CONDITIONS IN VIRGINIA, AS LATER IN OTHER COLONIES, encouraged the rise of powerful local elites. The stripping away of layers of provincial English customs and traditions that had moderated relations between rulers and the ruled, together with the abridging of English judicial institutions, central and local, created a political and social terrain more susceptible to unconstrained elite dominance than in England. Whereas English counties were governed by scores of titled and gentry families, many of whom had lived in their “countries” (regions) for centuries, the size of local elites in Virginia was tiny. Consequently, small groups of wealthy men were able to dominate their respective localities and the colony’s governance.[4](endnotes.md#en0180en)

 

A couple of dozen men, including Sir George Yeardley, cape (head) merchant Abraham Piersey, and Captain William Pierce, who had amassed large fortunes and lucrative offices, made up Virginia’s early ruling group. At his death, Piersey owned thousands of acres along the James River, a store and house in Jamestown, and a total of thirty-nine servants and slaves comprising “the best Estate that was ever yet known in Virginia.” During the turmoil following the 1622 massacre, he and other members of the elite such as Captain William Tucker and Samuel Mathews also accumulated, both fairly and fraudulently, huge areas of prime land together with cattle and goods from the estates of those who had died or gone back to England.

 

After the godly George Thorpe’s death in the massacre, one of the promoters of Berkeley Hundred, where Thorpe had lived, reported that Thorpe’s cattle and servants had been taken to Yeardley’s house, but he did not know what had happened to them. The failure of Sandys’s commonwealth and the end of Company rule offered plenty of opportunities for wealthy planters to expand their influence and power. No effective remedy to check their influence could be mounted in the colony or from England. With all the major offices of government under their control, together with the General Assembly and court, the colony’s leaders increased their already considerable political authority and as a result profited handsomely.[5](endnotes.md#en0181en)

 

At the same time, wealthy planters continued to cling to an elevated view of Virginia and themselves as holding a special place within the king’s realms and affections. The colony was, in their eyes, at least from 1619, far more significant than simply a commercial undertaking managed by a collection of merchants purely for profit. For Sandys and other Company leaders, it represented a new Protestant state in America, an unambiguous expression of English greatness just as Spain had established a great empire in the New World. After the end of the Company, planters looked forward to a fresh beginning under the new king that would confirm their special standing, which his proclamation of March 1625 formally acknowledging Virginia as part of his “Royal Empire” seemed to promise.[6](endnotes.md#en0182en)

 

Ironically, political institutions such as the General Assembly established by the Company to promote broad-based involvement in government became a principal means by which wealthy planter-merchants consolidated their power. They were no longer accountable, insofar as they had ever been, to Company oversight, and complaints about the corruption of leading officials by lesser planters were met with contempt and the meting out of brutal punishments. Over the next several decades, wealthy planters in the General Assembly gradually adopted more parliamentary privileges based on English precedents and strengthened their powers as the colony’s highest court. Officeholders gained extensive legislative experience at provincial level and took on growing responsibilities in localities as county magistrates and sheriffs, much like their counterparts in England. Given their governing experience, they saw themselves not as merely advisors to royal governors but as indispensable partners in running the affairs of the colony.

 

One early test of their influence arose with the appointment of governor Sir John Harvey, who arrived in Virginia in 1630 and soon became mired in endless disputes with his councilors who, instead of providing assistance “stand contesting and disputing my authority, averring that I can do nothing but what they shall advise me, and that my powers extend no further than a bare casting voice.” The struggle came to a head a few years later when a group of councilors forcibly removed Harvey from office and packed him off to England to face censure. It was a lesson not lost on future royal governors. Lacking financial or military resources to impose their authority, governors ruled largely with the approval of leading planters, not the other way around. Although the worse abuses of elite dominance were confronted in a large-scale revolt, Bacon’s Rebellion of 1676–1677, and the temporary imposition of military rule by the English government that followed, Virginia’s wealthy and well-connected planters continued to exert enormous influence over domestic and imperial affairs down to the American Revolution.[7](endnotes.md#en0183en)

 

POVERTY AND INEQUALITY WERE WORSENED IMMEASURABLY BY the evolution of slavery and racial prejudice, which emphasized early English America’s racial divide. When the*White Lion*and the*Treasurer*cast anchor at Point Comfort and sold most of the Angolans they had looted from the Portuguese slave ship they captured in the Gulf of Mexico, planters had been eager to buy them. Sandys was outraged, but more because he was aware of the damage the incident would do to his fragile relationship with James I, who was actively pursuing a pro-Spanish foreign policy at the time than out of any moral scruple. He showed little unease about the well-being of the Angolan men and women who were sold into slavery or about the fact that the Company’s own officers, Yeardley and Piersey, had acquired the majority of them. Sandys did not support the inclusion of African slaves in his commonwealth—he believed plenty of willing workers were available in England and hopefully among the Powhatans—but he took no steps to censure the governor or anyone else in authority for profiting from the transaction. From 1619, the highest officers and wealthiest settlers, including the governor, led the way as slaveholders, setting the tone for the rest of planter society over the next 246 years.[8](endnotes.md#en0184en)

 

Virginia planters followed the example of their plantation-owning counterparts in the Hispanic Atlantic world who over the previous century had acquired hundreds of thousands of African captives. By the early seventeenth century, approaching forty thousand African slaves worked in the ports and rural hinterlands of the Spanish Caribbean. In the same period, massive numbers of Angolans were transported to Brazil and Spanish America, underlining historian David Wheat’s point that Portugal’s colonization of Angola and the colonization of South America and the Caribbean “mutually reinforced one another.” The English in Bermuda, Virginia, and then the Caribbean quickly adopted Portuguese and Spanish models of slavery, as well as the racial attitudes that sanctioned them. Much of the vocabulary of English racism was adopted from Spanish America.[9](endnotes.md#en0185en)

 

With the growth of tobacco as England’s initial great transatlantic staple crop, big planters sought to acquire more Africans and, as they arrived in larger numbers after 1670, began to lay down harsh discriminatory legislation to police and protect their human property. Some ten thousand slaves were forcibly transported to the colony between 1670 and 1700, most from ports of Upper Guinea and the Bight of Biafra in West Africa. In the huge new statehouse built at Jamestown in this period, no more than a few hundred yards from the site of the church where the first General Assembly was held, burgesses and councilors sat regularly to create legislation that would strip Africans and African Americans of their basic human rights. It was a vicious cycle: from an English perspective, the growing presence of slaves toiling in tobacco fields was a significant marker of the difference between colonial society and the mother country, a difference that in turn permitted the drastic curtailments of rights and liberties of Africans and their descendants that would never have been allowed to occur in England.

 

The tenor of the legislation was chilling. After 1669, as already noted, a planter who killed a slave during corporal punishment could not be charged with murder or a felony; it became lawful to kill or wound a runaway slave who resisted arrest; any slave who lifted a hand against a “Christian” would receive thirty lashes; and a slave who was emancipated or a white man or woman who married an African American would have to leave the colony within a few months. The rights of the tiny number of free blacks were severely restricted also. Finally, in the first major piece of legislation passed in the new capitol in Williamsburg, the comprehensive slave code of 1705 brought together acts of the previous forty years and formally sanctioned an increasingly blunt delineation of Virginia’s racial system by including Indians and a new legal definition of racial difference, “mulatto.” It affirmed that all enslaved men, women, and children were defined in law as chattel. At the time of their passage, the laws applied to 13,000 enslaved men, women, and children; fifty years later, the number had risen to over 100,000, or nearly half the total population of the colony, and by the American Revolution, the number had doubled again to more than 200,000. Within three-quarters of a century, the entire social terrain of Virginia had been transformed and a massive and permanent enslaved class of laborers created, a trend followed by other southern mainland colonies such as South Carolina and Georgia.[10](endnotes.md#en0186en)

 

The arrival of the*White Lion*and*Treasurer*in 1619 may seem a long way from Thomas Jefferson’s Virginia, but several important points are worth emphasizing. Slavery originated in Virginia with the arrival of the first Africans in 1619. Although the colony did not emerge as a “slave society,” by which is meant a society where a large proportion of the population is enslaved, until the end of the century nonetheless the colony’s planters were among the first in the English Atlantic to reveal a strong and lasting preference for enslaved labor. Second, the fundamental elements of a slave system, supported initially by common practice and then subsequently by formal legislation, were established by well-connected planters in the half century after 1619. Third, the arrival of two privateers shortly after the conclusion of the first assembly underlines a highly significant development that worked upon early Virginia and the Company in this period. The plunder of Spanish shipping and possessions in the Caribbean by the English from island bases, such as Bermuda, had been a familiar and successful method of pillaging the wealth of the Indies for generations and represented a viable alternative to the founding of a self-sufficient mainland colony such as Sir Edwin Sandys envisaged. This tension was underscored within the Company by the rivalry and ultimately disastrous rift between Sandys and the Earl of Warwick, who espoused two quite different visions of empire. A fourth point, critically important, is that in recognizing the appalling impersonal forces that worked upon the lives of African and Indian victims of violence, slavery, degrading legislation, and harsh work regimes, we should not overlook their humanity or the importance of their own agency. Enslaved Africans and their descendants, Philip Morgan writes, “actively participated in their destiny*and*were victims of a brutal dehumanizing system. Subject to grinding daily exploitation, caught in the grip of powerful forces that were often beyond their power to control, slaves nevertheless strove to create order in their lives, to preserve their humanity, to achieve dignity, and to sustain dreams of a better future.” They endured in the hope that their lives would eventually improve or if not theirs, then perhaps their children’s or those of future generations.[11](endnotes.md#en0187en)

 

THE DISASTROUS SETBACKS OF 1622–1623 IN VIRGINIA AND England had led to the end of the Company, but old John Ferrar, Sir Edwin Sandys’s loyal deputy and steadfast friend, ultimately lived to see a commonwealth in Virginia. In 1649, thirty years after he and Sandys had launched their reforms, he wrote*A Perfect Description of Virginia*in which he related the felicity of the colony. Approximately fifteen thousand English settlers now lived in Virginia, he reported, and thousands of livestock of all kinds, hogs both tame and wild “innumerable,” and poultry “without number.” Recalling the Company’s efforts to encourage a diversified economy, he described how planters sowed “many hundred Acres of*Wheat,*as good, and fair, as any in the world, and great increase.” He listed barley for making excellent malt, six public brewhouses, and the planters’ own “strong and good” beer; all sorts of crops, fruits and vines, mulberry trees for silk, herbs, medicinal plants, birds, meats, and fish.

 

Virginia tobacco continued to be esteemed in all places, and although the price per pound was low, a man could make a good living from it. Indigo production returned ten times as much as tobacco, and the planters hoped “to supply all Christendom,” worth thousands of pounds. Iron ore was found in abundance throughout the colony and could be easily transported along the great rivers. Overall, such was the flourishing trade that thirty “sail of ships,” employing nearly a thousand mariners, arrived annually, mostly from England but also from New England and the Netherlands. Within three decades, Virginia had grown from a few small, struggling settlements to a wealthy and thriving province.

 

Ferrar took particular pleasure in describing the estate of “worthy” Samuel Mathews, a planter who had first arrived in Virginia about 1618 and had more than three decades’ experience in the colony. He was the very exemplar of a “deserving Commonwealthsman.” He had held all the major offices of state and had been a major figure in government, politics, and economic developments throughout his long career. At his extensive plantation on the James River, Mathews Manor, he owned a fine house and kept weavers and shoemakers as well as forty slaves, many of whom he was bringing up to crafts. He produced English grains, wheat and barley, beef cattle, dairy cows, and hogs, much of which was for provisioning oceangoing shipping en route upriver to Jamestown. Lt. Col. Mathews, Ferrar concluded, was a “true lover of*Virginia*” and his estate a miniature of what the colony’s economy under the administration of the Company could have eventually developed into, featuring a wide range of commodities, development of crafts, and plentiful work for thousands of English settlers who would come.

 

But of particular interest is less his assessment of the colony’s developing society and economy, which was unashamedly favorable, as his view of the dissolution of the Company. From the safe haven of a generation later, Ferrar was able to voice his opinion, and he chose not to hold back. Time was, he wrote of the early 1620s, that our statesmen “had store of Gondomores [Count Gondomar’s] gold to destroy and discountenance the Plantation of*Virginia,*and he effected it in great part, by dissolving the Company, wherein most of the Nobility, Gentry, Corporate Cities, and most Merchants of England, were Interested and Engaged; after the expense of some hundreds of thousands of pounds.” The reason was plain; the Spaniard had admitted it himself: he had been commanded by his master Philip IV of Spain to bring about the downfall of Virginia before the colony grew so powerful that English settlers would begin moving into Philip’s West Indies and “his Mexico” by sea and land. Tragically, owing to his misguided faith in Gondomar and the possibility of a Spanish alliance, James I and his courtiers had gone along with the plan leading to the Company’s ruin and setting back the colony’s potential development for decades.

 

In the light of the scale of the disaster that befell the Company, Ferrar can doubtless be forgiven a touch of exaggeration in his account of what had happened and the consequences, but there is also a good deal of truth in his reading of events. The Virginia Company was the only mercantile company of the era to be dissolved by quo warranto proceedings, enabled by authority of the king’s absolute powers. Parliament had no say in the matter. A long-lasting, powerful, private company that had invested tens of thousands of pounds was abolished by a legal instrument of the royal prerogative.

 

From this point of view, Ferrar’s mention of nobles, gentry, corporations, and merchants “Interested and Engaged” in the venture was not therefore simply an effort to emphasize the Company’s impressive and widespread support but rather a means of drawing attention to the Company itself being an expression of England’s commonwealth. The Company represented the leading political and economic classes of English society, oversaw the interests of its members (investors and settlers) for the common good, and governed through fair and open procedures in London and Jamestown, enabling those who had invested to have a voice. It had a specific focus on developing transatlantic trade, but it also had the responsibility of governing England’s first colony on behalf of Company members, settlers, and the nation. The dissolution of the Company had been an assault on the English commonwealth and a violation of the ancient constitution that would have lasting implications, the first of a series of major attacks by the Stuart monarchy on the liberties of the people.[12](endnotes.md#en0188en)

 

MOST OF THE ENGLISH RULING CLASS WAS DEEPLY INFLUENCED by the concept of the ancient constitution. An almost mystical formulation of custom and the common law precedents from time out of mind, it served as a vital guide for monarchs and the governing classes in confronting vexing political issues of their own age. In a mixed constitution and commonwealth such as England’s, balance was vital, especially between sovereign powers and the people’s liberties. For, Sir Edward Coke explained, “as the subject owes to the king his true and faithful allegiance and obedience so the sovereign is to govern and protect his subjects.” This was the unwritten but universally assumed compact between a just Christian monarch and his or her people.[13](endnotes.md#en0189en)

 

The broad constitutional discussions that took place in this period related to the ancient constitution would ultimately raise questions of the most fundamental kind. What was the proper balance between sovereign authority and subjects’ rights? What would happen if consensus were lost? How were the liberties of a free people defined and preserved? In terms of the gathering political crisis that would frustrate James I and ultimately overwhelm Charles, the abolition of the Company was a minor matter, but as a symptom of a troubling trend toward royal absolutism or, even worse, the likelihood of closer ties to Spain and possibly other Catholic states, the calculated destruction of the Company took on a much wider dimension. Ten years before Parliament presented the Petition of Right (1628)—a comprehensive list of grievances intended to persuade Charles to cease taxing and imprisoning his subjects without regard to the law—the major reforms introduced by Sandys and his supporters emphasized the Company’s determination to apply the principles of the ancient constitution and rule of law in Virginia. In its preamble, the Company’s great charter spoke of creating a “laudable form of Government by Magistracy and just Laws… for the happy guiding and governing of the people.” These laws were “not to be chested or hidden like a candle under a bushel,*but in form of a Magna Charta*[my italics] to be published to the whole colony.” All settlers “though never so mean,” had the right to appeal to the law for “speedy remedy.”

 

The desire to implement these measures at the same time that issues of governance and law were coming under intense scrutiny in England was not coincidental; it occurred because Sandys and many of the leading supporters of the Company had also been prominent critics of Crown policy in the fractious parliamentary sessions of James’s reign. What occurred at Jamestown in 1619 was a highly significant moment in the increasingly heated political ferment of the early seventeenth century that marked the beginning of a far-reaching Anglo-American debate about sovereignty and representative government.[14](endnotes.md#en0190en)

 

Shortly after John Ferrar had written his*Perfect Description,*Charles I went to his death still affirming his sacred duty to govern and protect his people. Viewed as the instigator of two civil wars against his people during the 1640s, Parliament and the army led by Oliver Cromwell saw no alternative but to put the king on trial for his crimes. With all trust between the warring parliamentarians and royalists long gone, the king was subsequently convicted and sentenced to execution. The people’s “Liberty and Freedom,” he declared from the scaffold, “consists in having of Government those Laws, by which their Life and their goods may be most their own.” Few in the crowd at Whitehall on that cheerless winter’s day would have disagreed, yet the reason he stood on the point of execution was precisely because by raising armies against Parliament and engaging in war, he had patently failed to defend his people’s rights and property.

 

A few years earlier, in language that once again few of his opponents would have found controversial, Charles and his advisors had offered one of the clearest expositions of the virtues of a mixed constitution of “absolute monarchy, aristocracy, and democracy.” He set out persuasively the reciprocal responsibilities of each of the three constitutional groups—king, lords, and commons—and confirmed that monarchs may not use their powers to oppress those “for whose good he has it.” But the main point of his argument revolved around the threat to law and order from below, not from the top. If the powers of the sovereign were first undermined, followed by those of the aristocracy, lords, and bishops, and then the privileges of the House of Commons, who would be left to govern? His prediction was bleak:

 

At last the Common people (who in the meantime must be flattered, and to whom License must be given in all their wild humors, how contrary [what]soever to established Law, or their own real Good) discover this*arcanum imperii*[secret empire] That all this was done by them, but not for them, grow weary of Journey-work, and set up for themselves, call Parity and Independence, Liberty; devour that Estate which had devoured the rest; Destroy all Rights and Proprieties, all distinctions of Families and Merit; And by this means this splendid and excellently distinguished form of Government, end in a dark equal Chaos of Confusion, and the long Line of Our many noble Ancestors in a Jack Cade, or a Wat Tyler.[15](endnotes.md#en0191en)

 

Charles’s forceful case against limiting the powers of monarchs took on greater significance following his death. The abolition of the House of Lords and creation of the English Republic in 1649 seemed to bear out his prediction and became a classic statement justifying nonresistance to absolutist rulers or even tyrants. Beset, as Thomas Hobbes put it two years after Charles’s death, “with those who contend on the one side for too great Liberty, and on the other side for too much Authority, ’tis hard to pass between the points of both unwounded.” Regarding the latter, should or could subjects protect themselves from those monarchs who by turning to absolutism were*themselves*the major risk to the people’s liberties? If absolute monarchs chose to interpret their prerogative powers broadly in ways that were contrary to accepted constitutional norms and traditional assumptions, what remedies remained to defend the people’s ancient rights and freedoms?[16](endnotes.md#en0192en)

 

Ultimately, at the core of these questions was the issue of accountability. How could (or should) kings be held accountable? James I wrote expansively about his divine regal powers but usually tempered his more extreme utterances by underlining his duty under God to protect his subjects’ lives and property. Yet his grand pronouncements of principle rarely matched his actions, no more than did his son’s, as England’s ruling classes discovered during the complete breakdown of constitutional relations that led to war in the three kingdoms, military rule, and the short-lived English commonwealth of 1649–1653.[17](endnotes.md#en0193en)

 

THE ACCOUNTABILITY OF MONARCHS, STATUTORY LIMITS ON sovereign power, and the protection of subjects’ rights evolved as the central constitutional propositions of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. They were voiced in the fiery political debates of the 1610s and 1620s that swirled around Westminster and Whitehall, were heard in the great merchant houses of the City of London, and for a brief period echoed in the governor’s council and General Assembly on the other side of the Atlantic at Jamestown. They would be taken up by parliamentarians, soldiers, and godly revolutionaries during the British Civil Wars of the mid-seventeenth century, and again by Americans in revolt who were determined to rid themselves of British rule and kings altogether. Kings and queens, Thomas Paine declared grandly in 1776, had reduced the world to “blood and ashes”—it was time to throw off the yoke of monarchy and create a republican self-government where the law “was king” and the people sovereign.[18](endnotes.md#en0194en)