---
title: "Chapter Five: Tumult and Liberty"
type: "reading"
book: "1619: Jamestown and the Forging of American Democracy"
author: "James Horn"
chapter_num: 5
source: "Horn, James - 1619- Jamestown and the Forging of American Democracy.epub"
date_added: 2026-05-25
tags:
  - hist_21103
  - reading
  - 1619
---

1619 

#*Five*

# Tumult and Liberty

Our first work is expulsion of the Savages to gain free range of the country.

*—Governor Sir Francis Wyatt (1622)*

Extreme liberty being worse than extreme Tyranny, as it first appeared by the troubles in Rome after Nero’s death.

*—Captain John Bargrave (1622)*

IN A LONG LETTER SENT TO THE COMPANY IN JANUARY 1622, the new governor, Sir Francis Wyatt, described the colony’s well-being and prosperity. Wyatt had recently convened a General Assembly at Jamestown in which measures were passed to advance the planting of a “great store” of vines and mulberry trees “in all places” throughout the colony and to have planters cultivate English grains and pulses as well as Indian corn. If the Company were to give encouragement to planters to grow more corn for their own sufficiency and to provide for the multitudes who would shortly arrive from England, the governor believed far less tobacco would be planted and corn would soon replace tobacco as the colony’s principal crop. He reported that an ironworks had been constructed upriver beyond Henrico, a windmill on Yeardley’s property at Flowerdew, and that George Sandys, Sir Edwin’s younger brother and the newly appointed treasurer on behalf of the Company in the colony, was building a watermill on his estate near Jamestown. Industries were being established and thousands of newcomers had arrived in good health over the previous few years and had been well received by those already settled in the colony. Most pleasing of all, the English lived “in very great amity and confidence with the natives.” Wyatt and his council were confident that the two Powhatan chiefs, Opechancanough and Itoyatin, wished to further strengthen relations with the colonists.

Delighted by the news, in April, Company leaders commissioned a sermon of thanksgiving to be delivered by Patrick Copland under the title “Virginia’s God be Thanked.” Unknown to them, however, a few weeks earlier, the colony had suffered the first of a series of disasters that would ultimately bring about the Company’s demise and the subsequent emergence of a society radically different from the Christian commonwealth envisaged by Sir Edwin Sandys and his supporters.[1](endnotes.md#en0141en)

ON FRIDAY, MARCH 22, 1622, IN A MASSIVE AND HIGHLY skilled attack led by the war chief Opechancanough, approximately 350 English men, women, and children were killed in their homes or at work about their plantations. Company official Edward Waterhouse wrote in a bitter account that elite warriors of the Powhatans and Pamunkeys, supported by other local Indians and hundreds of mercenary allies, had known exactly where to find the settlers “in regard of their daily familiarity, and resort to us for trading and other negotiations, which the more willingly by us continued and cherished for the desire we had of effecting that great masterpiece of works, their conversion.” All along the James River valley, from far upriver at the ironworks recently established at Falling Creek to the populous settlements of Henrico and Charles City, and as far downriver as Elizabeth City and Warraskoyack, English settlers were killed in brutal hand-to-hand fighting, overwhelmed by wave after wave of Indian warriors. Crops, livestock, and dwellings were destroyed and churches burned to the ground. The massacre, described by the English as “contrary to all laws of God and men, of Nature and Nations,” was to the Powhatans long-awaited revenge for the devastation of their towns, theft of their hunting grounds, and occupation of their lands by settlers; it was an utter repudiation of everything the English stood for, including their Protestant God.[2](endnotes.md#en0142en)

In stark contrast to his first report, Governor Wyatt’s next letter to the Company described in somber terms the catastrophe that had befallen the colony:

It has pleased God for our manifold sins to lay a most lamentable Affliction upon this Plantation, by the treachery of the Indians, who on the 22th of March last, attempted in most places, under the Color of unsuspected amity, in some by Surprise, to have cut us off all and to have Swept us away at once throughout the whole land.

Owing to God’s mercy many English had been saved, “but yet they [the Indians] prevailed so far, that they have massacred in all parts above three hundred men women and Children.”[3](endnotes.md#en0143en) Incredulous at the news, which arrived in London in July, the Company and English observers laid the blame squarely on settlers’ complacency and dissolute living. The reason why they “were so easily subject to the surprise of those naked people,” the letter writer John Chamberlain observed, was their “own supine negligence” whereby they had lived “as careless… as if they had been in England.” In his opinion, the disgrace and shame of the successful Indian attack was as bad as the losses sustained, “for no other nation would have been so grossly overtaken.” Company leaders were outraged, accusing the settlers of failing to heed clear warnings of an attack in a time of known danger. What had happened could only be interpreted as a sign of God’s dissatisfaction. The drunkenness and excessive ways of settlers were notorious, and it seemed obvious to observers in England that their neglect of divine worship had inevitably brought down the righteous anger of Almighty God. To avoid further retribution, the Company demanded they seek forgiveness and conform to His “most just and holy laws.” Only with His protection and blessing could they secure themselves from more attacks and rebuild the colony.[4](endnotes.md#en0144en)

Between a quarter and a third of the English settlers died that fateful day; it was one of the most devastating attacks to befall colonists in any part of the British Empire over the next several centuries. William Capps, an “ancient planter” of Elizabeth City, spoke for many traumatized survivors when he wrote: “God forgive me I think the last massacre killed all our Country, besides them they killed, they burst the heart of all the rest.” The enormity of what had befallen the colonists can be judged by the widespread fear that gripped them in the aftermath. The “land is ruined and spoiled,” a young servant Richard Frethorne lamented, and “we live in fear of the Enemy every hour.” He resided at Martin’s Hundred where he reported eighty of his countrymen had been killed, reducing the plantation to such a weak state that they would not be able to defend themselves should the Indians come again “for we lie even in their teeth.” Continuing attacks led the governor to order planters to vacate outlying plantations and find safety in larger communities and fortified settlements. As they withdrew, Opechancanough’s warriors were able to carry out the next stage of the plan, the wholesale destruction of settlers’ property, which the great chief hoped would ultimately compel the English to abandon the enterprise and Virginia. Before “two Moons,” Opechancanough assured his people, not a single colonist would be left in all their “Countries.”[5](endnotes.md#en0145en)

THE COMPANY HAD NO INTENTION OF LEAVING VIRGINIA, however. Owing to the continuing high price of tobacco in London and the possibility of reaching an agreement with James I guaranteeing a monopoly on the importation of tobacco from the colony, private investors continued to support the venture. Even after such a disaster, long-term prospects appeared promising. Hundreds of settlers were recruited to replace those who had been lost, “for, in the multitude of people is the strength of a Kingdom,” and schemes were put in place to organize a regular supply of young men from England’s shires. The Company ordered the four corporations and the particular plantations to be repeopled when safe from further attacks, and the manufacture of iron, trials of silk, and production of wines and other crops were to be resumed as soon as possible. Every good “Patriot” knew, Edward Waterhouse commented, that the founding of Virginia reflected glory upon the king and nation and was vital to the spreading of “Christian Religion” and to the enlargement, strength, and fortunes of James’s dominions. To abandon Virginia would be unconscionable. It would be “a Sin against the dead,” the Company stated, to give up the enterprise for which “so many of our Brethren have lost their lives.”[6](endnotes.md#en0146en)

As news of the massacre spread throughout England, an outpouring of racially charged language called for extreme measures and merciless reprisals. The attack had been a massive violation of natural law, contemporaries wrote, by which the Powhatans had lost all rights to their land and civilized treatment. Edward Waterhouse’s influential apologia written on behalf of the Company was subtitled*A Relation of the Barbarous Massacre in the time of peace and League treacherously executed by the Native Infidels upon the English.*The word*massacre*carried a special meaning for the English, recalling atrocities perpetrated by Catholics against Protestants such as the St. Bartholomew’s Day Massacre in France of 1572, during which thousands of Huguenots (French Protestants) were murdered, or the “Spanish Fury” in the Netherlands a few years later when mutinous troops went on a killing spree in Antwerp, one of the most important cities in western Europe. Since the founding of Jamestown, settlers’ leaders had feared above all the possibility of Spanish forces finding their way to the Chesapeake Bay, destroying the colony, and cutting the throats of the colonists, just as they had killed hundreds of French Huguenots from Fort Caroline half a century earlier on the bloody sands of Matanzas Inlet near St. Augustine, Florida. Such horrific cold-blooded killings had sent shock waves throughout Europe. The Reverend Joseph Mede, a millennialist who believed the end of times was fast approaching when Jesus Christ’s thousand-year reign would begin, had no doubt that God was on the side of the English. Just as a maleficent god was responsible for “the massacres now in France, and in other parts of Christendom,” the massacre in Virginia was encouraged by the Powhatan’s “wicked God Ochee [Okeus].” But “our God, the God of Gods,” he exclaimed, will “confound them quickly.”[7](endnotes.md#en0147en)

***

1619 

**FIGURE 7—**Title page of Edward Waterhouse’s*Declaration*of 1622. Permission of the Virginia Museum of History and Culture.

***

1619 

Waterhouse expressed the bitterness and frustration of the English public on learning their countrymen in Virginia had been undone by the Powhatans. His*Relation*embraced conventional attitudes toward American Indians that had long been widespread in Europe. European superiority was unquestioned, adopting, as philosopher and historian Tzvetan Todorov puts it, a combination of “authoritarianism and condescension.” In literature and images of the period, Indian peoples were typically portrayed either as inhuman or barely human, godless cannibals, or conversely as childlike, loving, gentle, and “void of all guile… such as lived after the manner of the golden age.” By their actions, the Powhatans proved they were of the treacherous and barbaric sort. Waterhouse’s account brims with pejorative terms such as*unnatural, pagan, bestial, perfidious, false-hearted, inconstant, wicked,*and*miserable.*Colonists, he wrote, had been unwise to place their trust in the Powhatans but had done so only with the best intentions. They had sought the Powhatans’ conversion “by peaceable and fair means,” seldom was a sword or musket drawn against them; they had been welcome at English tables or to shelter in settlers’ homes. In return, the English had been rewarded with treachery and cruel murder. Trust was “*the mother of Deceit.*”[8](endnotes.md#en0148en)

Yet to Waterhouse’s mind there was one tangible benefit of the disaster. Settlers’ efforts to occupy and profit from the land would no longer be inhibited by their responsibility to convert and civilize the Powhatans. “Our hands, which before were tied with gentleness and fair usage,” he wrote, “are now set at liberty by the treacherous violence of the Savages, not untying the Knot, but cutting it: So that we, who hitherto have had possession of no more ground than their waste, and our purchase at a valuable consideration… may now by right of War, and law of Nations, invade the Country, and destroy them.” In chilling prose, he set out what amounted to a justification of mass slaughter and forced removal that would serve as a blueprint for European colonizers over the centuries to come:

Because the way of conquering them is much more easy than of civilizing them by fair means, for they are a rude, barbarous, and naked people, scattered in small companies, which are helps to Victory, but hindrances to Civility: Besides that, a conquest may be of many, and at once; but civility is in particular, and slow, the effect of long time, and great industry. Moreover, victory of them may be gained many ways; by force, by surprise, by famine,… by pursuing and chasing them with our horses, and blood-Hounds to draw after them, and Mastiffs to seize them, which mistake this naked, tanned, deformed Savages, for no other than wild beasts, and are so fierce and fell upon them, that they fear them worse than their old Devil which they worship, supposing them to be a new and worse kind of Devils then their own. By these and sundry other ways, as by driving them (when they fly) upon their enemies, who are round about them, and by animating and abetting their enemies against them, may their ruin or subjection be soon effected.

Such techniques had been effective for the Spanish in the West Indies and South America and would be equally effective for the English. Though they were initially highly critical of the Spaniards’ brutal treatment and exploitation of indigenous peoples and had sought to distinguish their own compassionate approach to the Indians of Virginia, the English now cited the conquistadors’ bloody methods with approval.[9](endnotes.md#en0149en)

Waterhouse was not alone in his views. An epic poem by Christopher Brooke, a prominent supporter of the Company and parliamentarian known to Sandys, provides another example of the racially charged language that circulated after the massacre:

*For, but consider what those Creatures are, (I cannot call them men) no Character Of God in them: Souls drown’d in flesh and blood;*

*Rooted in Evil, and oppos’d to Good;*

*Errors of Nature, of inhumane Birth,*

*The very dregs, garbage, and spawn of Earth;*

*Who ne’re (I think) were mention’d with those creatures*

*Adam gave names to in their several natures*

*But such as coming of a latter Brood, (Not sav’d in th’Ark) but since the general Flood*

*Sprung up like vermin of an earthly slime.*

“Father’d by Satan, and the sons of hell,” the Indians had forfeited knowing “Th’ Eternal God,” joining the Anglican Church, and adopting English ways that would have brought them peace and prosperity. Jean Bonoiel, the French expert on silk production and viticulture, spoke for the Earl of Southampton and other Company leaders in repudiating the Indians as devoid of culture, industry, or arts. They were ignorant, idle, and brutish. As a consequence, he considered that “there is a*natural kind of right*[my italics] in you, that are bred noble, learned, wise, and virtuous, to direct them aright, to govern and to command them.”[10](endnotes.md#en0150en)

The massacre had demonstrated beyond doubt that the Powhatans could not be redeemed and converted to Christianity and English ways. For Sir Edwin Sandys and the Ferrars, it must have been a bitter realization. Lost to them once and for all was the hope of a Christian commonwealth in the New World that would unite English and Indian peoples in spreading the Anglican faith across the continent, creating a Protestant bulwark in North America to counter Catholic Spain in the south. It was left to George Sandys, who arrived in Jamestown shortly before the massacre, to come to the inevitable conclusion. Government, he wrote, was the principal “bond of society” allowing every man to suppress vice and advance virtue that were “the two main columns of a Commonwealth, without which it can have no support.” Man was “a political and sociable creature, [Indians] therefore are to be numbered among the beasts who renounce society, whereby they are destitute of laws, the ordination of civility.” By this standard, there was no longer any place for Indian peoples in the English colony.[11](endnotes.md#en0151en)

JUSTIFICATIONS FOR TAKING POSSESSION OF INDIAN LANDS IN America had been a central theme of English colonial discourse for half a century before Jamestown. Promoters of overseas expansion such as Sir George Peckham, writing in the early 1580s, explained that by the law of nations Christians had the right to enter the lands of “infidels” for trade and live there if they wished. Since “the nativity of Christ, mighty and puissant [powerful] Emperors and Kings have performed the like,” he emphasized, “I say to plant, possess, and subdue.” Such views formed the basis of European claims to Indians’ lands founded on the principles of just wars, the right to trade freely, and the holy work of converting the heathen to Christianity. Following the establishment of the Jamestown colony, the Company believed that redeeming and civilizing the Indians fully justified their right to settle in the Powhatans’ country. “Our intrusion into their possession [land] shall tend to their great good,” Robert Johnson declared, “yet not to supplant and root them out, but to bring them from their base condition to a far better.” However, should the Indians resist conversion, the colonists could lawfully make war on them providing the ultimate objective was to reclaim them from barbarous and sinful ways.[12](endnotes.md#en0152en)

Commencing the bloody work of conquest, the Company ordered Governor Wyatt to launch a “perpetual” war against the Powhatans without peace or truce. He was to deploy tactics adopted by Lord De La Warr, Gates, and Dale earlier, dispatching companies of soldiers to destroy the Indians by “burning their Towns, demolishing their Temples, destroying their Canoes, plucking up their [fish] weirs, carrying away their Corn, and depriving them of whatsoever may yield them succor or relief.” Usual rules of engagement did not apply. Nothing was unjust, Wyatt and his commanders told the Virginia Company, if it led to the Indians’ ruin. Children were to be spared in the hope that eventually they might be brought to Christianity, but the rest of the “bloody miscreants” were to be put to the sword or removed, as “they intended against us.”[13](endnotes.md#en0153en) Implicit in the phrase*perpetual war*was a strategy of total war, “for the glory of God, and love toward our brethren (whose blood, no doubt, cries to heaven for vengeance),” Wyatt proclaimed.

As occurred in the fighting of a decade earlier, the English were given license to kill Indian men and women or to starve them into submission. References to raids and the killing of Indian peoples from this period read as almost routine events in the colony’s reports. Sir George Yeardley’s men, for example, ranging the shore of the Weyanock people upriver from his plantation at Flowerdew, found only the Indians’ old houses, which they burned. In another report, Captain William Powell out on patrol met three Indians by chance “whose heads he cut off.” By the Indians’ own admission, the council in Virginia wrote, “we [the English] have slain more of them this year, than have been slain before since the beginning of the Colony.”[14](endnotes.md#en0154en)

Dehumanizing and demonizing the Powhatans fully justified the use of extreme violence. The adoption of new and efficient forms of artillery, firearms, weaponry, and light armor had proceeded rapidly in Europe across the late fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. The king showed his support for the colonists by granting them a princely gift of arms, armor, and powder from the royal armory in the Tower of London that was to be delivered to the Company forthwith. Weapons and equipment included 300 matchlock muskets, 700 calivers (a light form of musket), 300 pistols, 1,000 halberds, 540 coats and shirts of mail, 2,000 helmets, and 400 war bows with 800 sheaves of arrows, all of which were to be distributed to the settlers as Wyatt and his councilors thought fit. Many of the men who arrived in the colony during the first war with the Powhatans had served in the Netherlands and Ireland and would have been familiar with such weapons.

Halberds and bills, polearms typically six to eight feet long, were designed variously with vicious hooks, spikes, and axes and were employed to spear and hack the enemy; swords were used to sever heads and limbs, and short swords and daggers could be used to slash and thrust, causing massive internal bleeding and trauma. Musket balls were capable of smashing through cartilage and bone, causing terrible injuries that were usually fatal, killing by shock or infection if not by immediate blood loss. Firearms could be used singly or in enfilade fire to devastating effect. Small ships such as pinnaces or shallops were capable of carrying swivel guns, aptly named*murderers*, loaded with small shot to pepper settlements along the shores or groups of warriors. While Powhatan war bows were formidable weapons capable of delivering fatal arrow shots or debilitating wounds, their stone arrowheads could not penetrate armor.[15](endnotes.md#en0155en)

When conventional methods did not suffice, other stratagems were employed. In the spring of 1623, an emissary from Itoyatin visited Sir Francis Wyatt with a message from the chief saying that “blood enough had already been shed on both sides, that many of his People were starved, by our [the English] taking Away their Corn and burning their houses” and that they wished to return to their former lands. He offered to deliver to the English captives taken in the fighting and also his brother, Opechancanough, “the Author of the Massacre,” dead or alive. The offer was not considered genuine, but the governor and his council saw an opportunity to take advantage of the overture. Captain William Tucker was sent to the Pamunkey River with a dozen soldiers to conclude a peace with a large gathering of Indian chiefs and warriors. Following a number of speeches, Tucker passed round bottles of sack (fortified wine) to drink to the end of hostilities and the new peace. Tucker and his interpreter tasted the wine to show no treachery was intended, but drank from a different bottle while the Indians, including Itoyatin and other “great men,” were given poisoned wine. How many died is uncertain, but many suddenly became sick, giving Tucker and his men the opportunity to open fire, killing approximately fifty. As trophies, or perhaps to claim the bounty for killing Opechancanough, Tucker returned to Jamestown with pieces of the Indians’ heads.

Such a deceitful attack on European adversaries would have been unthinkable, but no criticism of the mass poisoning of Indians was voiced in either Virginia or London. Governor Wyatt sent a letter to the Company reporting that by a “successful stratagem” his men had not only rescued English captives but had also “cut off some kings and divers of the greatest Commanders of the Enemy, among whom we are assured Opachankano is one, it being impossible for him to escape.” The Company and colonists alike were mistaken in believing Opechancanough was dead, however, as well as in their assumption that the Indians had been dealt a decisive blow. Sporadic hostilities would continue for the next eight years.[16](endnotes.md#en0156en)

A major outcome of the first Powhatan war of 1609–1613 had been the settlers’ push into the heartland of Powhatan territory and establishment of settlements on the best lands along the James River valley as far upriver as Henrico. The “multitudes” of English taking up lands after 1618, a direct outcome of the Company’s reforms, was the principal reason why the Powhatans had resolved to resist the invasion of their territories. Following the massacre and the Indians’ failure to expel the English, settlers were determined to take possession of a far larger region than they had previously controlled, which embraced both the James and York River basins and potentially beyond to the Potomac. The assembly discussed building a palisade across the peninsula from Martin’s Hundred to Kiskiak and from the James River to the York River to keep the Indians out; a safe haven “much bigger than the Summer Isles [Bermuda],” Captain John Smith remarked, that would serve as a vast cattle range and be capable of supporting ten thousand settlers.

Increasingly, Company and settler policy focused not only on security but on making the land exclusively English. By “this last butchery,” the Reverend Samuel Purchas wrote of the massacre, the Indians had proved to be “more brutish than the beasts they hunt, more wild and unmanly than that unmanned [underpopulated] wild Country, which they range rather than inhabit.” As “Borderers and Out-laws of Humanity,” he continued, they had forfeited any rights to the land, and once rid of them, a bountiful Virginia enriched by European plants and animals and populated solely by English settlers would in time become “another England in America.”[17](endnotes.md#en0157en)

As well as being expelled from their traditional lands, Indian peoples were also enslaved. The Company discussed raising a colony-wide levy to support the war against the Powhatans, advising that captives could be used as “slaves” to pay soldiers and defray the costs. Captain John Martin, the old planter, argued against simply slaughtering the Powhatans, saying that they were “more apt for work than yet our English are.” He suggested using them to help produce silk, grow hemp and flax, act as guides for expeditions into neighboring “Countries,” and “row in Galleys and frigates.” William Capps assured John Ferrar that he could bring in “3 or 4 score [Indian] slaves to work about a fort or other servile work,” adding ominously, “but before I deliver them up I will make them sing new Toes, old Toes, no Toes at all, because they shall not outrun me,” meaning he would cut off Indian captives’ toes to prevent them from running away.

Further evidence of the Company’s interest in enslaving the Powhatans occurred a few years later when William Claiborne, surveyor and a member of the governor’s council, announced that he had devised a contraption for the “safekeeping” of Indians. The council was sufficiently impressed by Claiborne’s invention to grant him an Indian for the “better experience and trial” of it (no description was given of how the contraption worked). In any event, however it was achieved, Virginia was the first mainland English colony to enslave Indian peoples. Settlers had already adopted slavery following the arrival of the first Africans, and Indians would now suffer the same fate.[18](endnotes.md#en0158en)

Indian slavery never became a major institution in the colony, although following another large-scale attack in 1644 as well as hostilities in the mid-1670s, spates of enslavement ensued. Indian warriors taken prisoner during fighting were either sent to the West Indies or enslaved in the colony; only children under the age of twelve were allowed to remain in English homes, a distant echo of the Company’s plans to convert them to Christianity. A new great chief, Necotowance, assented to the status of a “tributary,” or subject, of the English king in 1646, and the chiefdom effectively broke up. Tsenacommacah was no more, only Virginia, and the Powhatans became a “declining minority” on the margins of their former lands. Some adopted English ways, abandoning their peoples altogether, while others were determined to retain their own traditional cultures and continued where they could to live largely separate from the English. By the end of the century, their numbers had dwindled to less than a few thousand dispersed across the region.[19](endnotes.md#en0159en)

The collapse of an inclusive Christian commonwealth was ultimately to prove ruinous for Sandys’s and the Virginia Company’s vision of Virginia. Absorbing the entire chiefdom, ten thousand Powhatans together with their vast territories, into English Virginia was a fundamental element of Sandys’s and other leaders’ plans. Indians would bring their specialized knowledge to the settlers, such as the cultivation of valuable crops, the location of mines and minerals in the interior, and finding a passage through the mountains to the Pacific or riches in the West. In the absence of thousands of Powhatans to populate and join with the settlers, the English were forced to rely on recruiting large numbers of men and women from England in an attempt to transport an entire settler population across the Atlantic, a feat achieved hitherto only by the Spanish and to a lesser extent the Portuguese. Company leaders recognized this greater role when they stated to the Crown’s ministers that they were not merely a company of merchants but were committed to transporting and settling people “in those uninhabited Territories under good government and consequently for the enlargement of his Majesty’s Dominions.”[20](endnotes.md#en0160en)

Large-scale migration was essential to the colony’s future development, but the Company simply did not have sufficient resources to supply the new settlers adequately during the voyage or immediately after arrival. Colonists complained bitterly of ships that were meagerly provisioned and grossly overcrowded. Weakened by malnourishment and prone to sickness from the putrid conditions on board, many new arrivals succumbed within a few months of landing. Lady Margaret Wyatt, the wife of the governor, wrote to her sister from Jamestown that “Few in the Ship that I came in are left alive.” During the height of the crisis, starvation and illness carried off so many, old planters as well as newcomers, that George Sandys reported the living were “*hardly able to bury the dead.*” For want of adequate shelter, men and women died where they lay outside under bushes and were left unburied for days. Reminiscent of the “starving time” in the colony’s early years but on a larger scale, 1622–1623 was the worst year the English endured in Virginia and at least a thousand settlers perished.[21](endnotes.md#en0161en)

PLENTY OF CRITICS WERE ON HAND TO FIND FAULT WITH SIR Edwin Sandys, notably powerful grandees of the Virginia Company such as Sir Thomas Smythe and the Earl of Warwick as well as several of the king’s ministers. The leading opposition figure in Parliament for more than a decade, Sandys had been a principal rallying point for the county gentry in the House of Commons and spoke to issues that concerned them with an unerring belief in the justice of their cause. Even before the setbacks in Virginia, he and some of his principal supporters found themselves in trouble with James I and his government for their alleged views on events taking place in Europe, which would eventually have a profound impact on the future of the Company.

In what many members considered a flagrant breach of parliamentary privilege, he and the Earl of Southampton had been imprisoned during the summer recess of the 1621 Parliament, and Sandys was subsequently placed under house arrest at his estate in Northbourne, Kent, as punishment for his alleged overzealousness in opposing royal policies both inside and outside the Commons. Specifically, he was questioned by Crown officials about his opinion of the proposed marriage of the Prince of Wales, Charles, to Infanta Maria of Spain, which was keenly supported by James and his court, and his sympathy for “the Lady Elizabeth,” the king’s daughter and wife of the Elector Palatine of the Rhine, Frederick V. Sandys, Southampton, and the Virginia colony became briefly embroiled in an international crisis of enormous dimensions.

Elizabeth and Frederick had married eight years earlier; it was the Protestant wedding of the year and an apparent success in James’s larger goal of strengthening relations with leading Protestant powers in Europe. In August 1619, Frederick had been offered the crown of Bohemia by rebel nobles in revolt against the Catholic Ferdinand II, soon to be elected the Holy Roman Emperor, and made a fateful error in deciding to accept. His rash action, against the advice of James, sparked a war in Bohemia, the Palatinate, and eventually much of Germany, Flanders, and northern Europe. Later known to history as the Thirty Years’ War (1618–1648), the massive convulsion of religious conflict embroiled all the major powers in the most devastating conflict of the era; what amounted to a Europe-wide war of religion.

Frederick’s decision was equally disastrous personally. Overwhelmed by Ferdinand’s forces, which were supported by veteran units of the Spanish army, Frederick and Elizabeth were forced to flee from Bohemia and also lost their lands in the Palatinate, quickly becoming the objects of pity of English Protestants who were baffled by James’s failure to intervene to save them from defeat and humiliation at Catholic hands. Righteous English people called for full-scale intervention in a war they saw not only as a matter of national honor but as a vital sign of the coming of the prophesied thousand-year rule of Jesus Christ on earth. The war was interpreted as a struggle between good and evil on a cosmic scale in which England would play a special role in fighting on the side of Christ and providing a bulwark against Catholicism. “This little island,” London preacher Thomas Cooper exclaimed, was the “sanctuary of all the Christian world,” by which of course he meant Protestants.

English America would also play a significant role. The dean of St. Paul’s, John Donne, believed like Sandys in the “Apostolical” promise of the expansion of English Protestantism in America. Speaking before Virginia Company leaders in November 1622, he assured them that “You shall have made this Island, which is but as the*Suburbs*of the old world, a Bridge, a Gallery to the new; to join all to that world that shall never grow old, the Kingdom of heaven.” In this vein, James I was viewed as a new Constantine, “the pacifier of the world and planter of the Gospel in places most remote.” A popular tract entitled*Merlin’s Prophesie*predicted that the king, the “Western Emperor,” would lead the Protestant princes in a holy war against Catholics and die on the battlefield after a great victory.[22](endnotes.md#en0162en)

Yet as it turned out, the king had other ideas. To the grievous disappointment of his zealous subjects, James chose instead to pursue an alliance with England’s old enemy Spain, believing that the marriage of Charles to the infanta would enable a speedy resolution to the conflict and restore his son-in-law to his estates. The king’s initiative was desperately unpopular with the people and exasperated members of the Commons during the 1621 Parliament, including Sandys, who were deeply suspicious of Spanish intentions.

From the king’s point of view, however, complex diplomatic negotiations that had been in progress for several years were now being jeopardized by the irresponsible behavior of the Commons. James accused “fiery and turbulent spirits” of meddling in “matters far above their capacities which tends to the infringing of our prerogative royal.” The House was ordered not to involve itself in discussion about the marriage and to forbear disparaging “the king of Spain, and other of our friends and allies.” But further, in an unnecessarily provocative statement of principle and political blunder of major proportions, he underlined to the speaker in reference to the imprisonment of Sandys, Southampton, and other members that “we think ourselves free and able to punish the misbehavior of any member in Parliament as well during the sitting as after.” The comment sent shock waves through the House, striking at one of the most sacrosanct of parliamentary rights: freedom of speech—an early hint of the acrimonious disputes between James, Charles I, and Parliament to come.[23](endnotes.md#en0163en)

Virginia Company officials as well as the rank and file were well aware of the significance of the arrest and detention of their two leaders. In the hothouse climate of the early 1620s, with so much at stake at home and abroad, members wondered who was responsible for turning the king against Sandys and Southampton. There were a number of possibilities: the Marquis of Buckingham or perhaps the young prince, who was also closely involved with Buckingham, but Company suspicions fell primarily on the influential Spanish ambassador (influential in James’s court at least), Don Diego Sarmiento de Acuña, Count of Gondomar. Rumors circulated in the city that it was he who called James’s attention to the frequent meetings of the Virginia Company where, the count said, “too many of his [the king’s] Nobility and Gentry resorted to accompany the popular Southampton, and the dangerous Sandys.” These meetings, he purportedly warned James, were likely to “prove a seminary for a seditious Parliament.” Gondomar apparently believed that politicians associated with Virginia had “further designs than a Tobacco plantation” and once sufficiently strong intended to launch attacks on Spanish possessions in the Indies, which would inevitably bring England into conflict with Spain.[24](endnotes.md#en0164en)

By the early 1620s, Parliament, particularly the House of Commons, viewed itself as indispensable in the maintenance of the people’s rights and welfare of the state. The heated deliberations in Parliament about the king’s pro-Spanish policy, together with clashes between Company leaders and members of James’s court, encouraged intense royal scrutiny of Sandys’s larger aims for Virginia. Against the background of the unfolding political crisis in England that pitted Parliament against king, these discussions stimulated a far-reaching debate about key principles of government, authority, and liberty in the home country and the colony.[25](endnotes.md#en0165en)

ANXIOUS TO INVOLVE HIMSELF IN SUCH WEIGHTY MATTERS was Captain John Bargrave, a well-educated and experienced man who, following service in the wars in the Netherlands, had eventually found his way to Virginia and established a plantation on the south bank of the James River near Martin’s Brandon; he then commenced a career of litigation against his neighbors and Company officials. In June 1623, seeking to curry favor with one of James’s most powerful ministers, he wrote a long letter to Lionel Cranfield, Earl of Middlesex and lord treasurer, which emphasized the dire threat of social and political turmoil in the colony. The timing of his letter was determined by the establishment of a royal commission a few weeks earlier by the king to investigate the calamitous events in Virginia of the previous year. In Bargrave’s opinion, the root of the problem was that the Company was ruled by “popular voices” that covered up their secret practices, and “it is a shame that the Commonweal of Virginia, depending on the Monarchy here, should be governed so.” An ardent supporter of the monarchy and hierarchy, he was convinced that the establishment of the General Assembly had given too much power to ordinary planters who took advantage of their newly granted influence to pursue policies that benefited themselves rather than the good of the colony.

Problems had first arisen when the Company was led by Sir Thomas Smythe, Bargrave believed. For a decade, the colony had labored under harsh regimes that had taught the planters inhumanity and injustice, which they in turn showed in their attitudes toward newly arrived servants and free settlers. But the Company’s current leaders who had ousted Smythe, headed by Sandys and the Earl of Southampton, were as much to blame. Understanding full well that “popular government does directly take away the power of the monarchy,” Sandys and his supporters had nonetheless heedlessly sown the seeds of liberty among the settlers and as a consequence had undermined their “discipline, strength and virtue to defend themselves against the domestic enemy,” the Powhatans. Company leaders, Bargrave alleged, did so “knowingly and wittingly” against the sovereign power in England, underlining the point by asserting that “*extreme liberty being worse than extreme tyranny*[my italics], as it appeared by*the troubles in Rome after Nero’s death.*” He concluded by assuring Middlesex that “I delight not to be an accuser, unless necessity enforce it,” which presumably it did in this case.[26](endnotes.md#en0166en)

A few weeks earlier, Sir Nathaniel Rich, cousin and ally of the Earl of Warwick, recorded a private conversation at which Bargrave claimed that Sandys was satisfied that those who went to Virginia should have “no Government put upon them but by their own consents,” adding that if his other business concerning the colony were looked into, it would “be found that he aimed at nothing more than to make a free and popular state there.” Through long association, Bargrave was convinced “there was not any man in the world that carried a more*malicious*heart to the Government of a Monarchy” than Sandys, for he had heard him say “that if ever God from heaven did constitute and direct a form of Government it was that of Geneva” (a Calvinist republic) and that he had told him he was dissatisfied with the “constitution and frame” of the government in the colony and intended to “*erect a free state in Virginia*” (my italics).

Bargrave reminded Rich that Sandys had persuaded the archbishop of Canterbury to allow the “Brownists and Separatists of England” to move to the colony. In turn, the archbishop had mentioned to him that he “should never like well of Sir E. S [Sandys]: those Brownists by their Doctrine claiming a liberty to disagreeing to the Government of Monarchs.” “Brownists” were separatists, named after Robert Browne who in the 1580s had been one of the first preachers to openly advocate separating from the Anglican Church on the grounds that godly Protestants could no longer wait for Elizabeth I’s government to carry out the necessary religious reforms to purify the church. Several groups moved to the Netherlands, one of which, later known to history as the Pilgrims, entered into discussions with Sandys in the winter of 1617 to negotiate moving to Virginia. In North America, they aimed to establish a community hundreds of miles north of Jamestown, near the Hudson River, where they could establish their own church and community and live free from the corruptions of old-world society. Sandys had been keen to recruit nonconformists not because he was sympathetic to their religious convictions, as was put about by his critics, but because puritan migration would give a significant boost to the colony’s growing population. The Pilgrims, of course, ended up settling in Plymouth, not Virginia, yet questions continued to be raised about Sandys’s own religious affiliations.[27](endnotes.md#en0167en)

Bargrave’s allegations might simply be dismissed as merely another example of the caustic gossip swirling around and within various factions of the Company at this time. He was not a man of influence, as he acknowledged himself, and any testimony he gave would inevitably be colored by his lengthy involvement in disputes with the Company about his lands and rights in Virginia. Ultimately, his provocative accusations were not included in evidence prepared by the Earl of Warwick’s supporters for the king’s inquiry into events in Virginia, probably because they were considered too extreme or might bring unwanted attention to the dubious financial conduct of the Smythe faction. Nevertheless, Bargrave’s remarks likely reflected a common perception of Sandys and those associated with him. Sandys was undoubtedly enthusiastic about establishing representative government as a vital component of building a commonwealth in the colony. Company leaders had approved of settlers having a say in conducting their own affairs, but in Bargrave’s view the impulse had gone too far, opening the way for sedition and rebellion.

The first meeting of the General Assembly, after all, had commenced with prayer and the burgesses taking the oath of supremacy to their “most gracious and dread Sovereign,” but it had ended with an entreaty from the burgesses for additional governing powers along with a clear warning to the Company should their request not be granted. John Pory, speaker of the assembly in 1619, had observed that if Company leaders refused their plea, the settlers might take it ill. This “people (who now at length have gotten the reins of former servitude into their own swindge [hands]) would in short time grow so insolent, as they*would shake off all government*[my italics], and there would be no living among them.” It was an astonishing comment. First was the assumption of equivalence, assuming the assembly should have a similar right to disallow orders from London just as the Company had the right by its charter to dismiss laws passed at Jamestown, and second was the bald comment that if the Company did not grant their request, the settlers might rebel and resist government altogether.

What Company leaders thought of these potentially incendiary remarks is unrecorded, but at a court held at his house in London on April 13, 1620, Sir Edwin stated briefly that although he had found the acts of the General Assembly “in their greatest part to be very well and judicially carried and performed” they had to be ratified by a General Court of the Company before being “confirmed.” The Company—not the settlers, in other words—would make the final determination about the colony’s legislation.[28](endnotes.md#en0168en)

Unchecked power threatened to corrupt elites, but the illusion of power among the poorer classes was even more dangerous, Bargrave observed. Because they had little or no stake in society, the landless lower classes were incapable of rule. They formed the great mass of people in all societies, who, owing to their dependence on others, effectively had no political will of their own. As a student of classical political philosophy, Bargrave was mindful of Cicero’s warning about demagogues who sought to win popularity among the people by promising an even distribution of property. What could be more “baneful” than that, Cicero asked, considering that the chief reason for the founding of cities and states was to protect private property? Bargrave was not opposed to limited social mobility but only in strictly prescribed forms that maintained stability and hierarchy. Hence, his unshakable faith in monarchy: the sanctity of property and individual property rights could only be guaranteed by the supremacy of the sovereign. For “the kings right no man will doubt but it immediately comes from god, and being the soul… of our government, from it we derive all the happiness and unity of our commonwealth. To depart from it or usurp upon the said sovereign power,” he cautioned dramatically, “is death.”[29](endnotes.md#en0169en)

Included with his letter to Middlesex was a treatise that Bargrave had written the previous year. Adopting the unusual artifice of speaking as the king,*A Forme of Polisie to Plante and Governe Many Families in Virginea*presented his views on the governing of Virginia and more broadly the emerging English empire, which spoke directly to the relationship of England to her colonies. Given that the colony had grown into maturity, he considered the time was right to put an end to Company rule and place it directly under royal authority. In Virginia, he argued, the government had been instituted by a Company to advance the private interests of the merchants and investors who sponsored it, not for the benefit of the settlers but mainly for themselves. Several joint stock companies “*have governed our free subjects in Virginia as if they were their servants*” rather than the king’s subjects, he wrote. Company rule had led to confusion over who was the supreme authority as well as to tyranny and corruption. By contrast, the “uniting power” of sovereign authority enforced by the king’s officers and courts would ensure good government throughout all English colonies and between England and her dependencies. Colonies “differing in condition” and “severed in distance and place” could thereby be brought under one supreme jurisdiction.[30](endnotes.md#en0170en)

Good government depended on the direct application of sovereign authority, Bargrave reiterated, to the end of guaranteeing security of property. Once again quoting Cicero, he noted that “by the instinct of nature, men were drawn into sociable assemblies,” yet the most important reason for men to join together was to look after “their goods.” Bargrave’s idea of commonwealth was founded on clearly defined and agreed social ranks that formed the major safeguard against “popular liberty.” The “mouth of equal liberty therefore must needs be stopped” and social rank among settlers had to be clearly delineated, which thereby “will immovably fix the form of the colony” and protect property. He laid out in detail the hierarchy of ranks from servants and tenants, who had only their labor but “no shares,” to landowners ranging from commoners and citizens to “lord patriots,” who would have extensive estates in England and rule over particular plantations or corporations in Virginia. Just as in England, the principal governors of the colony would be drawn from the eminent and wealthy.[31](endnotes.md#en0171en)

ALTHOUGH MANY OF THE PROPOSALS WERE IMPRACTICAL, Bargrave’s*Polisie*was nonetheless a remarkable document. It spoke not only to fundamentally important political issues of how best to fashion new English societies overseas but also to the role of the monarchy in providing a fixed central authority from which ultimately all power flowed. He understood that the creation of a “perfect commonweal” in individual colonies depended on fashioning suitable social and economic conditions as well as an effective political framework. He proposed a form of government firmly based on sovereign authority that would discourage the concentration of power and office in the hands of the few, which he believed inevitably led to corruption, yet he was equally apprehensive about the potential of unrest from below.

Sandys’s purpose was in some regards the same, although considerably more pragmatic. He also sought to grasp the opportunity to create an English society in America that reflected and improved upon that of the mother country. True to his stoicist cast of mind, emphasizing reason and its practical application, his reform program for Virginia embraced elements of humanism, the ancient constitution, commonwealth theory, moderate Anglicanism, and corporate thinking. His approach to reform and the creation of a commonwealth in Virginia was powerfully influenced by his learning, religious beliefs, and experience at the highest levels of commerce and politics over the previous two decades. He, like Bargrave, had reached the conclusion that the colony had matured into a society (as opposed to a garrison or trading outpost), a tiny offshoot and very different kind of English society compared to that of England but one that was nonetheless capable of sustaining its own institutions under the authority of the Company and the king. In mid-November 1620, he had referred to Virginia as a “Commonwealth and… Country [*sic*] Colony”; the word*country*is crossed out but perhaps suggests his line of thought.

Yet for Sandys, the implications of the emerging maturity of the colony were entirely different from Bargrave’s. To the latter, the colony had outgrown the Company and should be ruled directly and impartially by the monarch in the best interests of the crown and subjects. To Sandys and his supporters, the colony’s rapid development was a measure of the Company’s success and therefore the Company should be supported in times of adversity, such as after the massacre, rather than impugned by the king’s government for what Company leaders considered unforeseeable setbacks.

Company leaders, such as Lord Cavendish, son of the Earl of Devonshire, strenuously denied allegations that their forms of government, whether in the colony or their Company meetings in London, were “Democraticall and tumultuous.” He pointed out that since their administration was subordinate to the absolute authority of the king as was plainly specified in their charter it “must necessarily be Monarchial.” It was true, he argued, their government had “some show of a Democraticall form” but only because it was the most effective means of bringing about prosperity in the colony, encouraging support from investors, and therefore achieving “the ends and effect desired by your Majesty: for the benefit, increase, and wealth of these Plantations.”

Neither the Company nor Sandys were explicit, but in defending their governing procedures—which included the active involvement of governors, councils, courts, and assemblies—they were merely reiterating accepted wisdom that mixed government was the superior type. More particularly, political practice throughout the Tudor period and James’s reign in encouraging an expansion of the responsibilities of Parliament was a clear endorsement of a monarchial system that fully embraced representative government; what some historians have labeled as monarchial republicanism or “a democratic form of government that was also headed by a monarch.” Compare this, Cavendish remarked, with ideas put forward by Sandys’s political foes, especially Sir Thomas Smythe and the Earl of Warwick, who were intent on reestablishing an oligarchy of powerful merchants such as had mismanaged the Company and colony before 1619.[32](endnotes.md#en0172en)

At issue in 1619 and years down to the decision by James I in 1624 to revoke the Company’s charter was what form of government should prevail. The answer was left to James’s son Charles I, who succeeded to the throne in late March 1625 and who oversaw the translation of Virginia into England’s first royal colony in America. On May 13, eighteen years to the day after the arrival of the first colonists off Jamestown Island, the king vowed to protect and support the colony in the same measure as any other part of his realms. Virginia’s government, he declared, would not be committed to any company or corporation, “to whom it may be proper to trust matters of Trade and Commerce, but cannot be fit or safe to communicate the ordering of state affairs, be they of never so mean consequence.” Company land grants would be honored, and Charles pledged to maintain all “public Officers and Ministers” at the Crown’s charge as well as lending support to the tobacco trade. The pronouncement by the king in 1625 to institute direct rule in America by the dissolution of a commercial company created a powerful precedent regarding Crown authority in the extended polities of the emerging English Atlantic.

Despite Charles’s sweeping statement of the supremacy of his “Regal Office,” however, England’s empire in America evolved in practice as a patchwork of jurisdictions whereby colonies were governed by royal governors, proprietors, and companies in combination with differing forms of legislative bodies. The Crown never adequately defined a vision of a centralized administration for its overseas dominions, which led to considerable ambiguity about relationships between colonists and royal officials that persisted throughout the entire colonial period.[33](endnotes.md#en0173en)

TO SANDYS, LEGITIMACY OF GOVERNMENT STOOD UPON THE twin pillars of just laws and the consent of the governed. Consent was vital because private property was at stake. As Lord Cavendish explained to James in April 1623, Virginia had been founded by the king’s grace and permission, but the “charge or expense” had been chiefly borne by “the private purses of the Adventurers” who would never have joined the venture if they had been denied a voice “in the regulating and governing of their own business.” A century and a half later, a very similar argument would be taken up by colonists to defend their rights against what they viewed as aggressive parliamentary and Crown policies following the French and Indian Wars.[34](endnotes.md#en0174en)

The controversies that engulfed Sandys and the Virginia Company in the aftermath of the Powhatan attack were part of the much broader constitutional crisis gathering on England’s horizon. But precision is required here lest the argument is misconstrued. Sandys’s and the Company’s establishment of representative government in Virginia in 1619 was not the first blow struck for American independence. As already mentioned above, the Company did not intend to inflame Parliament against the king or erect a popular government or republic in Virginia. Nevertheless, it is notable that Sandys was involved in many of the major political confrontations with James about governance, and it is unlikely to be simply a coincidence that, following his imprisonment in 1621, one of the measures passed by the General Assembly two years later stipulated that “no burgesses of the general Assembly shall be arrested during the time of the assembly, a week before and a week after.” The connection between discussions about self-government and the rule of law in England and Virginia during this period is patent and significant.

In 1625, after the dissolution of the Company, Sir George Yeardley journeyed to England to plead with the king and privy council “that their liberty of General Assemblies may be continued and confirmed, and that they may have a voice in the election of officers.” The following year, privy councilor Sir Dudley Carleton warned the Commons of the risk of displeasing the king who might be forced to “use new counsels” and rely upon his prerogative powers as other kings (absolutists) in Europe were doing, thereby eventually doing without parliaments. Following the highly acrimonious Parliament of 1628–1629, as Carleton had predicted, Charles decided to rule alone without an intention to call a future parliament. If the king adopted an absolutist government, ruling only with the guidance of his ministers, would the same fate eventually befall Virginia in the form of a royal governor ruling without an assembly?[35](endnotes.md#en0175en)

The Virginia Company’s and Sandys’s insistence that settlers ought to be represented in their own assembly not only established the first representative government in America but also raised fundamental questions about the nature of peoples’ rights, consent, and freedoms. Sir Robert Phelips, during a heated debate in the Commons in 1628 on the Crown’s arbitrary imprisonment of subjects, stated tersely, “We are now upon the point of liberty; first let us understand the thing, then the right, and lastly the violation put upon it. The condition of a free man is to live where there is not*dominum regale,*but*dominum regale politicum,*and this is the state of England.” Phelips was referring to Sir John Fortescue’s critically important distinction between absolute kingship (*dominum regale*) and those kings who ruled with parliaments and upheld the ancient constitution and rule of law to protect the people and their rights (*dominum regale politicum*). “The “point of liberty” was not only protection from external or internal oppression, David Harris Sacks writes, but was the essential underpinning of a polity governed by “representation and consent.” It was*the*fundamental principle of the constitution that the English in the mid-seventeenth century and American colonists 120 years later would fight to uphold.[36](endnotes.md#en0176en)