---
title: "Chapter Four: Commonwealth"
type: "reading"
book: "1619: Jamestown and the Forging of American Democracy"
author: "James Horn"
chapter_num: 4
source: "Horn, James - 1619- Jamestown and the Forging of American Democracy.epub"
date_added: 2026-05-25
tags:
  - hist_21103
  - reading
  - 1619
---


# Commonwealth

*Chapter Four*

Nothing [is] so difficult as to establish a common wealth so far remote from men and means.

*—John Smith (1612)*

Every commonweal, as says Aristotle,… is a company, and every company is ordained to do some good, and most chiefly to obtain the most principal and most excellent good of others.

*—Henry Manship (1619)*

IN AN ENTHUSIASTIC REPORT DELIVERED TO THE COMPANY on November 15, 1620, Sir Edwin Sandys proclaimed that “the Commonwealth and State of the Country [*sic*] Colony in Virginia began generally to prosper.” Aided by John Ferrar and Nicholas Ferrar and supported by the Earl of Southampton, Sandys looked to fashion a society that promoted an abiding commitment to Anglican ritual and God’s word, just laws, equitable government, and an economy based on a wide variety of crops and industries, trade, and public works that would benefit the Company and the multitudes of settlers who would shortly flock to the colony. Essential also was the godly task of converting the entire Powhatan people to Protestantism, a “noble Action for the planting of *Virginia,* with Christian Religion” as the English saw it, thereby bringing tens of thousands of Indians to the Church of England and advancing their eventual integration into settler society.<sup>[1](endnotes.md#en0109en)</sup>

The establishment of a New World commonwealth was at the heart of Sandys’s plans for the colony. It combined in a single framework the many political, social, and economic changes that Company leaders believed were indispensable to the creation of a well-governed society. Their approach, both in conception and in their determined efforts to implement it, represented an extraordinarily ambitious view of the potential of American colonies. The shape of English America in terms of good government, just laws, economic well-being, and friendly relations between settlers and Indians would rest upon the success or failure of their far-reaching ideas.

SANDYS AND OTHER COMPANY LEADERS WERE WELL VERSED in the major political theories of the day, and hence commonwealth was a familiar concept to them. Although its meaning had taken on different emphases from the late fifteenth to the early seventeenth centuries, at its core it remained the same: an expression of the critical relationship between a healthy body politic on the one hand and the people’s welfare on the other. Inspired by the church’s teachings, civic humanism, and the sweeping changes rapidly transforming the country, a rich and passionate debate had developed about the ideal balance between private enterprise and the common good. “A public weal is a body living,” the humanist scholar Sir Thomas Elyot wrote, “made of sundry estates and degrees of people, which is disposed by the order of equity and governed by the rule of moderation and reason.” Concerned above all with the maintenance of law and order, he outlined the proper roles each estate should play if the “public weal” was to thrive. A well-ordered commonwealth depended on everyone knowing and accepting their place within a finely grained hierarchy of households and achieving a harmonious balance of interests. Emphasizing the people’s well-being, Thomas Starkey described a “true common weal” as nothing less than “the prosperous and most perfect state of a multitude assembled together in any country, city, or town governed virtuously in civil life according to the nature and dignity of man.”<sup>[2](endnotes.md#en0110en)</sup>

Contemporary thinkers were unanimous in praising the blessings of England’s constitutional commonwealth. Inspired by the teachings of classical thinkers such as Aristotle, Polybius, and Cicero, two of the most influential statesmen of the age, Sir John Fortescue and Sir Thomas Smith, gave primacy to the rule of law and Parliament as the twin foundations of the English constitution. As early as the 1470s, in one of the first statements of its kind, Fortescue wrote approvingly that English monarchs could not alter the law without the consent of their subjects or burden them with unjust impositions. The king was appointed by God “to protect his subjects in their lives, properties, and laws; for this very end and purpose he has the delegation of power from the people; and he has no just claim to any other power but this.” By consenting to laws passed in Parliament, which represented the entire kingdom, the people were secured in their property and thereby enjoyed a higher standard of living than their counterparts in continental Europe, governed for the most part by absolute sovereigns who cared little for their people’s rights or well-being. The peculiar genius of the English, Fortescue believed, lay in creating a series of mutually reinforcing relationships that brought together monarchy, government, and the people in the form of a res publica (commonwealth) that profited everyone. In this way, the people were able to prosper from the natural resources and commodities of the land and from trade. In turn, their affluence and happiness profited the monarchy and encouraged social stability.

Elaborating upon Fortescue’s interpretation a century later, Sir Thomas Smith gave further definition to England’s mixed constitution. In *De Republica Anglorum,* he maintained that although the monarchy was the most powerful part of the realm’s body politic, the other two components—aristocracy and the people—also had an important role in governing, notably by their participation in the greatest of the sovereign’s councils, Parliament. Parliament, Smith wrote, was the “most high and absolute power of the realm of England” where the people were “collected together and united by common accord.” The sovereign and representatives of all the estates of the kingdom, from highest to the lowest, sat together to deliberate on laws and to consider “what is good and necessary for the common wealth.” In one of his most famous remarks, he emphasized that Parliament gave expression to “the whole universal and general consent and authority as well of the prince as of the nobility and commons, which is as much to say of the whole head and body of the realm of England.” By means of consensus in Parliament, described as the “whole realms deed,” no man could justly complain if he disagreed with decisions taken “but must accommodate himself to find it good and obey it.” Consent of the people, directly or indirectly, was essential to representative government.

Yet if England’s mixed constitution depended on a judicious balance of rights and responsibilities between the rulers and the ruled, it was characterized by considerable ambivalence. English political thought evolved simultaneously in two opposing directions during the sixteenth century: the monarch provided a symbol of unity within the realm, but Parliament gave voice to the commonwealth, the people, which, according to the historian Glenn Burgess, had a “life of its own” and represented a multiplicity of opinion. Just how harmony and balance was achieved among the different spheres of government and between the government and the people was not explained at any length, for example. And what redress was available to the government or the people should England’s constitutional well-being be compromised or lost was equally uncertain.<sup>[3](endnotes.md#en0111en)</sup>

The question was especially urgent given the social disruption caused by the far-reaching religious, political, and economic changes taking place during this period. Widespread enclosures of common lands, vitally important to small farmers and tenants for grazing their livestock or for cultivation, disrupted age-old practices; enormous transfers of property during the English Reformation stripped the Catholic Church of its properties and put them into the hands of the gentry and aristocracy; and rapid population growth and rising inflation led to a spectacular rise in the numbers of impoverished men and women out of work and on the tramp. Traditional society, it was said, was “far out of joint.”

Writers trying to make sense of the turmoil penned fierce critiques of the unrestrained greed of the wealthy at the expense of the poor. “When I consider and weigh in my mind all these commonwealths which nowadays anywhere do flourish,” the principal character of Sir Thomas More’s popular satirical work *Utopia,* Hythlodaeus, remarked, “God help me, I can perceive nothing but a certain conspiracy of rich men, procuring their own commodities under the name and title of the common wealth.” The idle rich bled the common people dry, reducing them to lives of unceasing toil just to eke out a bare existence. At the height of the social and economic crisis of the 1530s and 1540s, Protestant moralists such as Thomas Becon, Henry Brinkelow, Robert Crowley, and Hugh Latimer, known collectively as the “commonwealthsmen,” wrote scathingly about the wealthy who lived without fear of God or conscience and who “would have all in their own hands,” leaving nothing for others. They were “the very caterpillars of the commonweal,” consuming all in their lust for more worldly possessions. “Overmuch regard of private and particular wealth,” Thomas Starkey cautioned, “ever destroys the common[weal].”<sup>[4](endnotes.md#en0112en)</sup>

Such critiques also highlighted the importance and moral worth of work. “Let every man, of whatsoever craft or occupation he be of,” the preacher William Tyndale declared, “refer his craft and occupation unto the commonwealth, and serve his brethren as he would do Christ himself.” Work sustained people, undergirded order and hierarchy by emphasizing the importance of divinely appointed vocation, and fostered advantageous relationships between the people based on the principles of honest labor and just dealings. “Remember that we are members of one body,” Tyndale continued, “and ought to minister one to another generously.” Sir Thomas Smith agreed that people should help support those less fortunate than themselves but recognized that to inspire the better off to provide support for the poor, the government had to devise policies that simultaneously promoted self-interest as well as the common good. Men, he argued in *A Discourse of the Commonweal of England *(written for private circulation in 1549 but not published until 1581), “should be provoked to good deeds by rewards.” Allowing people to benefit from their labor would lead to greater productivity and thereby profit the individual and the community.

The commonwealthsmen, of whom Smith was one, thus looked for solutions that encouraged responsible and virtuous gentry leaders to take care of the poor in their localities and at the same time arouse a strong sense of Christian stewardship and charity within the people. Their admonitions were infused with the righteous zeal of the Reformed religion that involved, as the historian Keith Wrightson has remarked, nothing less than “the remoralising” of society. On the whole, most reformers responded conservatively and nostalgically to the extreme economic dislocation that engulfed them, looking back to an idealized age of plenty in order to restore an earlier age of social harmony. But what if the wide-ranging changes taking place across the country were irreversible? What if there were too many people looking for work but not enough work to go around? What then?<sup>[5](endnotes.md#en0113en)</sup>

From this perspective, it is hardly a coincidence that promoters of English colonization schemes in Ireland and America came to prominence in government and mercantile circles following the social upheavals of the mid-sixteenth century. Commerce and colonization were linked to state policy in respect to foreign relations, propagating the new Anglican Church, and addressing domestic problems. Advocates of western planting argued vigorously that English settlements in America would relieve poverty and underemployment while promoting trade and manufactures at home. Christopher Carleill recounted that during the wars in the Netherlands, he had witnessed firsthand how men who had formerly “been very evil and idle livers” had proved most industrious against the armies of Philip II of Spain. Employment in the colonies would serve a similar purpose.

Richard Hakluyt the younger, the foremost writer in favor of American colonization of the day, observed that despite all the statutes devised by Elizabeth I’s government to punish “idle vagabonds,” the country continued to be overrun by “multitudes” of able-bodied poor and unemployed, an “altogether unprofitable” drain on the country. “[Y]ea, many thousands are within this Realm, which having no way to be set on work be either mutinous and seek alteration in the state, or at least very burdensome to the common wealth, and often fall to pilfering and thieving and other lewdness, whereby all the prisons of the land are daily pestered and stuffed full of them, where either they pitifully pine away, or else at length are miserably hanged.” In the colonies, he wrote, they could be found work to their own and the nation’s advantage. Petty thieves and vagabonds who “for trifles may otherwise be devoured by the gallows” could save themselves by laboring in America. Later writers such as Gerard de Malynes and Francis Trigge continued to comment on the close relationship between dire poverty and lack of work in early seventeenth-century England.<sup>[6](endnotes.md#en0114en)</sup>

The settlement of English colonies, then, had a dual role—it was a means of addressing intractable social problems at home and an opportunity to extend the realm overseas. Although the Virginia Company was a private commercial enterprise, it was supported by the Crown and carried the king’s sovereignty to America. Such an arrangement was expedient for James I, who could take advantage of the potential benefits of colonization but deny Virginia was a state-sponsored undertaking when put under pressure by a succession of Spanish ambassadors to intervene and prevent settlement. More generally, overseas expansion was a primary means by which ambitious nation-states asserted their power and pursued “greatness”—a theme in contemporary political literature—as English statesmen and adventurers such as Sir Walter Ralegh and his half brother Sir Humphrey Gilbert were well aware. Their efforts to establish colonies in the 1580s were influenced significantly by the strategic imperative to counter the existential threat posed by Philip II of Spain’s global empire to England and to confront the Spanish American empire by establishing an English empire in the north.

Sir Edwin Sandys was similarly attracted by the pursuit of greatness in a colonial setting but viewed it instead through the lens of commerce and the creation of a New World commonwealth, a “perfected” English society in America. As well as trade, Sandys strenuously advocated a colony devoted to the “publique,” a commonwealth that would benefit all those that ventured themselves or their money and which represented an improvement on English society, principally in respect to the well-being, moral as well as economic, of the people.<sup>[7](endnotes.md#en0115en)</sup>

FUNDAMENTAL TO A FLOURISHING COMMONWEALTH WAS HIERARCHY and good order. Sixteenth-century commentators were agreed that the happiness of the people rested squarely on the quality of their governors’ judgment and virtue. The effective exercise of authority by rulers depended on rank, ability, and character. They “which be superior in condition or property should also have preeminence in administration” because a gentleman’s virtue was commonly mixed “with more sufferance, more affability, and mildness.” Ordinary working people or those of base lineage, it was held, lacked the capacity for learning or a level of reason that allowed them to rule and therefore could only occupy the lowly stations that God had ordained for them. Starkey observed that the people benefited from “laws well administered by good officers and wise rulers, by whom they be governed and kept in politic order.” For this reason, the Company received proposals from a couple of its members in July 1619 and the following year to establish a nobility in Virginia made up of earls, viscounts, barons, and baronets that would underline the colony’s conformity with English society as well as “faith and fidelity to the Crown.” The scheme came to nothing, but the desire to attract men of “extraordinary quality and good condition” remained. Impartial and moderate rule by leaders was not only a practical requirement but also a moral one, the London preacher Robert Gray emphasized. “There must be a special care in the Magistrate,” he wrote,

how to carry himself in his place and order: for herein consists the very main matter of the success of this business [the founding of a commonwealth]. As therefore the Magistrate has the eminence of dignity conferred upon him by his Prince, so must he furnish himself with eminence of virtue: for he shall the better contain others within the bounds and limits of honesty and godliness, if he first be able to contain himself… A Magistrate therefore must have a good conscience towards God, and he must also have a loving affection towards those over whom he has the government.

Such precepts reflected a conventional emphasis on hierarchy and obedience that went back time out of mind and highlighted expectations about the reciprocal duties of rulers and the ruled. A leader who failed to maintain order failed not only in his responsibilities to the people under his charge but also to God.<sup>[8](endnotes.md#en0116en)</sup>

Company officers could feel confident in the “quality” of those who supported the enterprise in London: the list of lords, knights, and merchant princes involved in the management of the Virginia enterprise or who had signed up as investors reads like a who’s who of the time and represented an emphatic endorsement of the project by men of high political and social standing. It was important, therefore, that the governor of Virginia should be of similar rank. Hence the Company was highly gratified by Lord De La Warr’s decision to sail for Jamestown with his wife and retinue to resume his position as captain general and lord governor of Virginia in 1618. Apart from the ill health that had dogged him over the years, there could be little doubt about his suitability for the position or that his presence would confer luster to the new form of government they planned to introduce. During his absence of seven years, the leadership of the colony had rested on the shoulders of knights and captains, for the most part able men but not lords. Consequently, De La Warr’s death at sea in the summer of 1618 was a serious setback for the Company that required a speedy resolution. The man chosen for the role, Captain George Yeardley, had arrived in the colony with Sir Thomas Gates in 1610 and had proven to be a dedicated commander, briefly serving as acting governor before returning to England in late 1617. Yet while Yeardley was from a respectable middling background, he was not remotely of high rank.

The solution that emerged in the fall of 1618 illustrates the paramount importance attached by the Company to social hierarchy and status. At the end of November, several senior members of the Company’s council, including Lord Doncaster, a gentleman of the king’s bedchamber and member of the privy council, joined James I at Newmarket and spoke on behalf of their recently chosen governor. Yeardley was ordered to attend to learn what service he could render the king. Shortly after arriving in the king’s presence, James commanded Yeardley to a “withdrawing chamber, where with the sword of estate he dubbed him knight,” after which he joined James at a church service and then with the king’s entourage for dinner. The king spoke to Yeardley for a full hour and a half about many aspects of the colony, after which he remarked to the bishop of Durham, “My Lord this is the first day that ever I began heartily to love Virginia, and from this day forward I will ever protect and defend it.” A promise, as it turned out, he did not keep.

Returning to London a few days later, Yeardley met with several of the great officers of state and peers of the realm who also conferred their blessings on him and his endeavor. The anonymous letter writer R. F. concluded “that I may justly say, that no governor nor other officer that ever were sent to Virginia, departed the land with so great encouragement from his Majesty and the great ones, or with so general notice and hopeful expectation of all men, as this gentleman we have now employed.” Yeardley had been elevated to the highest level of society and carried with him to Virginia the king’s approval as well as the backing of many of his most important clerics and ministers of state. No better endorsement of the new governor and the Company’s plans could have been hoped for.<sup>[9](endnotes.md#en0117en)</sup>

AS WELL AS EFFECTIVE AND VIRTUOUS RULERS, SANDYS’S CONCEPTION of a well-run commonwealth was founded on involving the people in their own public affairs. As a member of the House of Commons, he had enthusiastically advocated consulting with his constituents before adopting a final position in Parliament. He fully acknowledged the divine right of sovereigns to govern but also believed passionately in the constitutional right of the people to have a means of expressing their opinion. Consent bred concord, “the strongest and loveliest bond of security in every Commonwealth, being always accompanied by Justice and Equity,” the great Roman orator and statesman Marcus Tullius Cicero remarked in one of his most famous statements.

In this vein, Sandys and his supporters considered a representative body located at Jamestown absolutely essential; otherwise, settlers would have insuperable difficulties making their voices heard at the colony level or before the Company in London. The newly established General Assembly offered a collective means by which settlers could seek remedies for perceived injustices, general or particular, react to laws devised by the Company, and propose legislation of their own based on their familiarity with conditions in the colony. In fact, a few years later, such was the encouragement given by these measures that members of the assembly declared the people followed their labors with “singular alacrity” and Virginia flourished as never before. Sandys and his followers understood that to persuade settlers to adopt the Company’s vision of a new reformed society, a broadly representative body in the colony was indispensable. In that realization, the principle of representative government in America was born.<sup>[10](endnotes.md#en0118en)</sup>

At the local level, towns and corporations would carry the main burden of implementing commonwealth principles. “[N]othing does sooner cause civility in any country,” Edmund Spenser had commented in 1596, “than many market towns, by reason that the people repairing often thither for their needs, will daily see and learn civil manners of the better sort… there does nothing more enrich any country or realm than many towns.” Spenser was writing of Ireland where efforts to establish towns were strongly supported by English and Scottish undertakers (sponsors and colonizers), but the comment was equally applicable to America.

From the beginning, Virginia’s backers anticipated the colony would quickly develop an urban network extending from Jamestown along the James River valley. Robert Johnson, deputy to the treasurer Sir Thomas Smythe, wrote in 1609 that in addition to Jamestown, the Company planned to settle “six or seven plantations more, all upon, or near our main river, as capital towns, twenty miles each from other, and every plantation shall manure and husband the lands and grounds lying near unto it, and allotted for the circuit thereof.” Initially established as garrisons, the Company favored the creation of towns for the same reason their counterparts sponsored towns in Ireland and the Spanish founded cities and ports in their New World colonies: urban settlements would evolve their own local governments, courts would be established to redress of grievances, and the creation of regular markets would encourage prosperity, all thereby promoting order and stability. During the early years of Sandys’s reforms, so much emphasis was given to the foundation of towns by the colony’s investors that the prospects of Virginia as a whole were measured in terms of urban growth. The Company believed that a “flourishing Church, and a rich Commonwealth” depended on towns.<sup>[11](endnotes.md#en0119en)</sup>

Towns’ charters conferred valuable privileges on their inhabitants. Corporate rights endowed townspeople with freedoms that protected their trades and craft practices that in turn promoted their collective and individual wealth. Company leaders, like prominent merchants and statesmen elsewhere in Europe, were town and city dwellers “steeped” in a “corporate civic humanist tradition.” Multiplied hundreds of times over, the wealth of prosperous towns collectively added up to the wealth of nations. Giovanni Botero, an influential intellectual and scholar, had no doubt when he wrote in his *On the Causes of the Greatness of the City* of 1588 and his *Reason of State* of the following year that the preeminence of states and princes rested on the fortunes of their cities, calculated by population, trade, and industry rather than purely by the size of their territories or strength of their armies. For Sandys, who was familiar with Botero’s writings, the creation of towns and eventually cities in Virginia was essential not only in the immediate term of encouraging civility and prosperity but also to the longer-term vision of a continental-sized English North America founded on transoceanic commerce.<sup>[12](endnotes.md#en0120en)</sup>

Virginia’s four “ancient general Burroughs” would not have looked like towns to most English observers, however. They covered enormous areas: Henrico, Charles City, James City, and Kecoughtan (Elizabeth City) extended west to east from the falls of the James River to its mouth at the entrance of the Chesapeake Bay and beyond to the Atlantic coast, a distance of more than one hundred miles as the crow flies. Each corporation was made up of hundreds of thousands of acres spanning both sides of the James. The handful of wooden towns (there was little brick or stone) that existed in anything more than name were small and rudimentary affairs, typically laid out in a few streets with a church, a couple of storehouses, and several dozen dwelling houses, “built homelike,” the whole protected by palisades. They formed tiny urban cores of the corporations, the latter made up of plantations, large and small, Company and common lands, and huge areas of uncleared land, marsh, and woods scattered along the rivers. Despite these humble beginnings, Sandys and Company leaders were confident that their “city commonwealths” would develop as the essential building blocks of the new, reformed society about to arise.<sup>[13](endnotes.md#en0121en)</sup>

THE CREATION OF TOWNS AND CORPORATIONS WAS NECESSARY to provide local governing structures for the thousands of settlers who would shortly arrive. Mass migration was essential for Virginia to prosper. Twelve hundred settlers had been sent in 1619, and a similar number had left or were about to leave England in the following year. Most of them, the Company claimed, were hardworking men “born and bred up to labor and industry.” Men and boys from all parts of the realm were sent to work the land as servants, tenants, or freeholders, and artisans and tradesmen were recruited to provide important services. After entering into an agreement with London authorities, the Company was able to transport to Virginia hundreds of poor children who would serve as field-workers and domestic servants and who would otherwise have pestered the streets and public places of the city. The arrangement was considered an especially pious and reputable undertaking that both relieved London of the unwanted poor who drained municipal coffers while at the same time provided needed workers for the colony. City authorities organized the rounding up of vagrant children for transportation and threatened those who did not want to go with imprisonment. Robert Gray had warned Company leaders a decade earlier of the social dangers of overpopulation in the mother country. Poverty and unemployment inevitably led to social unrest, food shortages, “and sundry sorts of calamities.” By contrast, as the Company was quick to point out, opportunities for productive work in Virginia would both profit the poor and supply England with the valuable commodities needed at home.<sup>[14](endnotes.md#en0122en)</sup>

Company leaders sought to recruit the best artisans in Europe to establish profitable manufactures in the colony. Skilled Frenchmen were hired from Languedoc and La Rochelle to oversee the “planting and dressing of vines,” silk production, and development of saltworks. (One of them, John Bonoeil, had written *A Treatise on the Art of Making Silk* for James I.) Poles, or “Polackers,” from “Eastern parts,” probably the Baltic region and Northeast Europe, were recruited to produce potash, pitch, and tar; Germans were recruited from the Rhine to make wine and from Hamburg to set up lumber mills and shipbuilding; and Italians were sent to Jamestown to produce beads “for trade in the Country with the Natives” and to make glass “of all sorts.” Sandys’s and the Company’s commonwealth was to be peopled by skilled workers, industrious planters, virtuous women, the redeemed poor, and Christianized Indians.<sup>[15](endnotes.md#en0123en)</sup>

Persuading women from respectable backgrounds to settle in the colony was especially important. The assembly had petitioned the Company in 1619 to recruit more women settlers, stating “that in a new plantation it is not known whether man or woman be more necessary.” Sandys and his followers were of the same mind and undertook measures to address the shortage of virtuous and hardworking women. A “Plantation can never flourish until families be planted,” the Company confessed. “Wives and Children fix the people on the Soil.” A special fund was raised to pay the costs of passage, clothing, and provisions for “young, handsome, and honestly educated Maids,” who in Virginia would be “disposed in Marriage to the most honest and industrious Planters.” Approximately 150 young women were sent to Virginia during 1620 and 1621 to be wives to planters who could afford to start their own families. Among them was Lettice King, whose brother was “an Attorney at the Law” and cousin a knight. From Newbury, Berkshire, she had been “in divers [many] good services” from which she came recommended. Cicely Bray of Gloucestershire, twenty-five, was related to Sir Edwin Sandys. Katherine Finch was in service with her brother Mr. Erasmus Finch, the king’s “Crossbow maker,” and was recommended by two other brothers, all living in the Strand, London. Alice Burgess, twenty-eight, a maid from Linton, Cambridgeshire, was an orphan who had been in service to a goldsmith and then a silk weaver near Whitechapel Church in London. She was described as “skillful in any Country work” and could “brew, bake, and make Malt etc.” The Company’s effort to recruit reputable young women to marry planters was among the most ambitious of their social initiatives and one of the clearest indications of their desire to create a stable, well-ordered society based on virtuous families.<sup>[16](endnotes.md#en0124en)</sup>

To give further encouragement to new colonists as well as the settlers already in Virginia about future prospects, Company leaders granted two extraordinary boons. Recognizing free settlers’ investment, whether by service or stock, Sandys and his associates authorized that everyone would receive land for themselves and their heirs. Settlers who had arrived before spring 1616, who were termed “ancient planters,” were to receive one hundred acres for their own adventure and if they were investors another one hundred acres for every share purchased. Those who had arrived after April 1616 and paid their own passage would receive fifty acres for themselves and an additional fifty for every person they transported. The latter arrangement, which became known as the headright system, was for the rest of the century the primary means by which laborers were recruited and sent to the colony. Secondly, following “the laudable Example of the most famous Commonwealths both past and present,” the Company pledged to relieve settlers of the corporations of all taxes and public costs “forever.”

Keeping in mind that the enormous areas of land attached to each of the four corporations were only made possible by the convenient fiction that the Powhatans had freely given up their territory, Company leaders in London could afford to be generous. Confident therefore that huge tracts of land would be available for private as well as public use for many decades to come, the Company commanded Sir George Yeardley to set aside public lands “for the maintenance and support as well of [the] Magistracy and officers as of other public charges.” Three thousand acres of “good land,” to be called the “Company’s Land,” was to be allotted within each of the four corporations and would be worked by tenants transported to the colony at the Company’s expense. Tenants would receive half the return from their labor, and the other half would be reserved for the Company. Before remitting the Company’s share to London, the expenses of the colony’s officials and other Company costs would be paid. In addition, another 1,500 acres were assigned to each corporation as common land for “the Support and Entertainment” of magistrates, and local officers as well as “other charges to the said Cities and Burroughs respectively belonging.” Finally, the governor would receive 3,000 acres for his own support, the land to be laid out a few miles from Jamestown. Particular plantations were to remain separate from the Company’s corporations, but if their sponsors cooperated by obeying the new government in Jamestown, they would also receive 1,500 acres of common land.<sup>[17](endnotes.md#en0125en)</sup>

THE LEADERS OF THE FOUR CORPORATIONS AIDED BY COMPANY officials were to implement plans for the diversified economy that Sandys and others in London demanded. James I had urged Yeardley on the eve of his departure for Jamestown to pay particular attention to silk production, which he thought “would prove a sufficient recompense for all o[u]r labors,” and showed great interest in many other natural commodities and manufactures that the colony might produce. The “precious liquor” of vines, the king reckoned, “would not only prove merchantable” but would attract “good company to come and live there.”<sup>[18](endnotes.md#en0126en)</sup>

A promotional pamphlet of June 1620 gave full voice to the Company’s enthusiasm for the type of economy they believed would dramatically improve the colony’s fortunes. For at least thirty years, writers had claimed that Virginia was capable of producing many of the goods that had been imported into England from Europe and Asia for centuries. Now that they had the political and governmental structures to allow the blossoming of the diversified economy, regular trade with Britain could be established. To underline the point, the pamphlet writer spelled out the particular commodities available in the colony and which old-world countries had traditionally imported such goods into England:

We rest in great assurance, that this Country, as it is seated near the midst of the world, between the extremities of heat and cold; So it also participates of the benefits of both, and is capable (being assisted with skill and industry) of the richest commodities of most parts of the Earth. The rich Furs, Caviar, and Cordage which we draw from *Russia* with so great difficulty are to be had in *Virginia,* and the parts adjoining, with ease and plenty. The Masts, Planks, and Boards, the Pitch and Tar, the Pot-ashes and Soap ashes, the Hemp and Flax, (being the materials of Linen,) which now we fetch from *Norway, Denmark, Poland,* and* Germany,*are there to be had in abundance and great perfection. The *Iron,* which has so wasted our * English* Woods, that itself in short time must decay together with them, is to be had in *Virginia *(where wasting of Woods is a benefit) for all good conditions answerable to the best in the world. The Wines, Fruit, and Salt of *France* and*Spain;*The Silks of * Persia* and*Italy,*will be found also in * Virginia,* and in no kind of worth inferior. We omit here a multitude of other natural Commodities, dispersed up and down the various parts of the world: of Woods, Roots, and Berries, for excellent Dyes: of Plants and other Drugs, for Physical service: Of sweet Woods, Oils, and Gums, for pleasure and other use: Of Cotton wool, and Sugar-Canes: all which may there also be had in abundance, with an infinity of other more.

Company leaders hoped that by producing at least some of these commodities on Company lands in each corporation and reaping the healthy profits that would follow they might also tempt settlers to produce them on private lands. To this end, they passed legislation that required settlers to plant mulberry trees, vines, and silk grass for the next few years as well as trials with hemp, flax, and aniseeds the following growing season. In subsequent years, reports mentioned the cultivation of fig trees, pomegranates, cotton wool, sugarcane, indigo, and potatoes, all part of the effort by Company and colony leaders (the council, assembly, and local corporations) to persuade planters to abandon their reliance on tobacco in favor of a range of crops and manufactures that would lead to a strong economy and a sturdy class of independent farmers and craftsmen.<sup>[19](endnotes.md#en0127en)</sup>

Land reforms, including individual allocations to planters and economic initiatives, were intended to promote a durable commonwealth. Company-sponsored common lands offered further incentives. While only slight evidence exists about how the 1,500 common acres located in each corporation were used, whether in the form of communal grazing for cattle and hogs or as smallholdings, there can be little doubt that the symbolism of common land would have been obvious to settlers, especially those from rural regions of England. Many of the settlers’ parents and grandparents had lived through the mid-sixteenth century when across the country landlords attempted to encroach upon tenants’ common lands or enclose them altogether. From the 1530s onward, the English countryside was peppered with demonstrations by small farmers and poor industrial workers against challenges to their customary rights. The “earth is the poor man’s as well as the rich,” Henry Brinkelow thundered. Whereas the true gentry were “fathers of the country [and], maintainers of the poor,” Thomas Becon wrote, corrupt and avaricious landlords were by contrast “no gentlemen” but “extortioners” who had reduced the common people to ruin and beggary.

Sandys’s Virginia offered an opportunity to escape the vicious cycle of overpopulation and unemployment that had stunted the lives of English poor and lower-middling working people for a century. Huge tracts of land taken from the Powhatans were available for cultivation, and hence there was plenty of work for everyone who ventured the Atlantic crossing, whatever their social condition. The destitute boys and girls with “no places of abode or friends” swept up from the streets of London would find a new life along the James River employed “in some Industrious pursuit.” Land and work would give them and all immigrants a livelihood, a place in society, and even to some degree respectability.<sup>[20](endnotes.md#en0128en)</sup>

VIRGINIA WAS TO BE A GODLY SOCIETY. THE CHURCH OF England had arrived with the first settlers who held their services initially under sailcloth suspended between trees. Early in 1608, the colony’s first church was built at Jamestown in the middle of the fort as a clear statement of the presence of the Anglican Church in English America and was followed a few years later by three more churches at Henrico, Charles City, and Kecoughtan. With Sandys’s energetic support, the Company promoted further construction: a new church was built at Jamestown in 1617–1618 to replace the earlier structure that had fallen into disrepair, and churches or places of assembly were built at several private plantations including Smith’s Hundred, Berkeley Hundred, and possibly Wolstenholme Town. James I had told Governor Yeardley at their meeting at Newmarket that the colony’s churches were to be recognizable as such, not built “like Theaters or Cockpits… but in a decent form, and in imitation of the churches in England.”

The Christianizing of the landscape by the construction of churches and places of worship was vitally important to the Company’s emphasis on establishing a “reformed” society in which Anglicanism and piety guided the everyday lives of colonists. At Berkeley Hundred, a group of Gloucestershire settlers were enjoined to gather daily for prayer and meals and to hold the day of their arrival as a special day of thanksgiving. The Sabbath was to be kept “in holy and religious order” and used for preaching and teaching and manual labor; “vain sports and scandalous recreations” were banned. To attract “learned and painful [conscientious] Ministers,” each corporation and private plantation was to allocate one hundred acres as glebe land for maintenance and in addition provide a very handsome living of £200 yearly. Ministers and churchwardens were to be responsible for keeping watch for “all ungodly disorders,” described by the General Assembly as idleness, gaming, swearing, drunkenness, and whoredom. They were to set an example in morals and to avoid factions and “Novelties,” which tended “only to the disturbance of peace and unity.”<sup>[21](endnotes.md#en0129en)</sup>

Ministers were expected also to emphasize the vital importance of community and *bonum publica *(public good) in everyday life. In churches throughout England, by way of communion, sermons, psalms, and homilies, the laity was exhorted to come together to bear witness to the natural bonds of human fellowship, underpinned by the mutual love and charity for which Christ had died on the cross. Following the first great commandment to “love the Lord thy God,” Jesus explained that the second commandment was to “love thy neighbor as thyself.” The homily on *Christian Love and Charity *(1547) reiterated the commandment and amplified Christ’s message: “Thus of true charity, Christ taught that every man is bound to love GOD above all things, and to love every man, friend and foe.” Christian charity in daily life meant helping the poor, sick, helpless, and even enemies in distress. Participation of the laity in church services, maintaining the church and churchyard, and celebrating holy rituals throughout the year were vital expressions of the ties that bound local communities together. The teachings of the church offered moral guidance to the community, helped individuals understand their place within it and within the social hierarchy at large, and provided compelling lessons about how to live as good Christians, lessons that held special meaning to men and women living on a distant shore of the English world, surrounded by a heathen population.<sup>[22](endnotes.md#en0130en)</sup>

From the Company’s point of view, Christian charity, community, and caring for neighbors translated above all to the great work of converting the Powhatans to Anglicanism, a keystone of Sir Edwin’s plans. A decade earlier, the Company had sponsored a series of sermons that recast the relaunching of the colony by Sir Thomas Smythe following its near collapse as a divinely appointed national undertaking. The “plain necessity of this present action for Virginia,” William Crashaw proclaimed in 1610, “the principal ends thereof being the plantation of a Church of English Christians there, and consequently the conversion of the heathen from the devil to God.” As a chosen people, English preachers and settlers had been given a sacred mission: to cross the ocean and spread the light of the true faith into the dark corners of a heathen and savage land, “even where Satan’s throne is.” Robert Johnson, aware of the huge expansion of Catholicism among Indian peoples of Spanish America, exhorted all well-affected subjects to adventure their purses or persons to support the new colony and “spread the kingdom of God, and the knowledge of the truth, among so many millions of men and women, Savage and blind, that never yet saw the true light shine before their eyes.”<sup>[23](endnotes.md#en0131en)</sup>

Despite the glorious providential rhetoric and exhortations from the Company for support from investors and godly settlers, the effort collapsed amid the vicious fighting of the Powhatan war of 1609–1613. Following the end of hostilities, the conversion of Pocahontas and her subsequent marriage to John Rolfe gave the Company renewed hope, briefly kindling the possibility that the daughter of the great chief Wahunsonacock would involve herself in the conversion of her people. Her death at Gravesend, England, at the beginning of the voyage back to Virginia in the spring of 1617 dealt another grievous blow to the Company’s ambitions. Yet disappointing as earlier efforts had been, Sandys and his associates were determined to revive widespread support for conversion of the Powhatans; their vision of a Christian commonwealth depended on it. “We hold,” Sandys’s former mentor the great Anglican theologian Richard Hooker had written, that “there is not any man of the *Church* of*England,*but the same man is also a member of the * commonwealth,* nor any man a member of the * commonwealth* which is not also of the *Church* of*England.*” A shared faith was necessary to create a single community.<sup>[24](endnotes.md#en0132en)</sup>

Sir Edwin Sandys was an intensely religious man. Ironically in this regard, for all his political differences with James I, in his passion for religious reconciliation in Europe he shared much in common with the king. James I was viewed by Protestant thinkers in Europe as a “reconciler” of faiths, a monarch who might promote “the concord of the Church with common consent.” The church, James was convinced, encouraged “moral behavior, peace in the commonwealth, and true learning.” Most important, achieving stability and peace in Europe depended on bringing about reconciliation among the major religious factions. Sandys was of the same opinion. In midlife he had written a comprehensive account of the religious landscape of western Europe following two years of traveling on the continent. The manuscript,*A Relation of the State of Religion… in the severall states of those westerne parts of the worlde *(1599), surveyed the impact of the massive religious upheavals of the sixteenth century, the Reformation and Counter-Reformation. Civil wars in France between Catholics and Protestants (Huguenots) and the revolt of Dutch provinces against Spanish rule had torn western Europe apart, devastating once-flourishing cities and provinces.<sup>[25](endnotes.md#en0133en)</sup>

What could be done to end the carnage? Sandys believed the solution lay with “worthy princes” who following a middle course would bring about “unity over all Christendom, if it may be.” He favored a moderate church and believed that Anglicanism came closest to a model for compromise. The key phrase, however, was “if it may be,” because he did not consider political conditions in Europe remotely conducive to religious unity. He, like many other religious humanists, may have fervently hoped that the Christian church would eventually reunify, but he did not think it possible as long as Catholic Spanish monarchs backed Rome as the only true church. Unless Spain’s global dominance was significantly reduced or their support for the papacy withdrawn, the bloody conflict between Protestant and Catholic states would continue. This being the case, the best that could be achieved was to encourage a peaceful coexistence grounded on religious toleration among those states not at war.<sup>[26](endnotes.md#en0134en)</sup>

With religious conflict breaking out in Europe in 1618 once again, the appeal of converting the Powhatans and founding a new Protestant Christian order in Virginia was irresistible to Sandys and his supporters. They understood the wider implications. Reconciliation and peace among Protestant faiths in Europe, espoused by the king, would be complemented by English efforts to bring Anglicanism to the Indians of North America. If the Company succeeded in bringing the Powhatans into the Church of England, it would be but a short step to converting them en masse to civility and Englishness. Five years earlier, Sir Thomas Dale had overseen an important ceremony with leaders of the Chickahominies, a large and powerful people in the heart of Powhatan’s territories, during which they had pledged to recognize James I as their king and to take the name of “Englishmen.” As far as Dale was concerned, because of the Indians’ willingness to be called English and pay an annual tribute, they had put themselves under James’s protection and were therefore his vassals, even if they viewed the relationship quite differently. Before Sandys’s and the Company’s efforts of 1619–1622, the arrangement was the closest colonists had come to adopting the Indians as English, albeit as vassals rather than subjects. But even that success was short-lived; there had been no further progress with other peoples and a few years later the Chickahominies repudiated the agreement and took Opechancanough as their king.<sup>[27](endnotes.md#en0135en)</sup>

Sandys’s predisposition to compromise and his pragmatism in public matters inclined him and his principal advisor, John Ferrar, to adopt a cautious approach in trying again to bring the Powhatans into the church. To this end, the Company urged settlers:

both present and to come, may be faithfully brought up in the true knowledge and service of Almighty God, and so learn to frame their lives and conversations,… [that] by their good example, to allure the Heathen people to submit themselves to the Scepter of God’s most righteous and blessed Kingdom, and so finally join with them in the true Christian profession.

Such was the intention in theory, but in practice Company and colony leaders placed their faith in first converting Indian children who in turn would convert their parents, their kin, and the larger population. Each borough, city, and particular plantation, the General Assembly ordered, was to take “a certain number of the natives’ children to be educated” and the most promising boys would be “fitted for the College intended for them that from thence they may be sent to that work of conversion.” James I had already expressed his enthusiasm for the project by ordering charitable collections to be taken throughout the country by the Church of England in 1616 and 1617. Monies would be used to establish a college, which would be built in Henrico together with (eventually) a university on ten thousand acres, allocated by the Company, for teaching Powhatan children.<sup>[28](endnotes.md#en0136en)</sup>

The king supported the Company’s pious efforts, which corresponded to his own broader ambitions in Europe. At Newmarket, he had expressed to Governor Yeardley his enthusiasm for the college and the prospect of Indian children “as laborers into gods harvest,” converting those of “their own nation to the Christian faith.” The letter writer R. F. observed that in discussions about spreading religion “his Majesty, like a true nursing father of god’s church, expressed marvelous great zeal and affection.” In England, support for the Company’s religious initiative continued to grow. An anonymous message left on Sandys’s chair at a court meeting wished him good luck “in the name of the Lord, who is daily magnified by the experiment of your Zeal and Piety in giving beginning to the foundation of the College in Virginia the sacred work so due to Heaven and so Longed for one [on] earth.” Together with the letter, several items of valuable church plate were donated, adding to the thousands of pounds collected over the previous five years for the building of churches and schools as well as the college at Henrico.<sup>[29](endnotes.md#en0137en)</sup>

Company plans were given further impetus by the arrival of Mr. George Thorpe from Berkeley, Gloucestershire, in the spring of 1620. Formerly a member of Parliament and gentleman of the king’s privy chamber, Thorpe was a major investor in Berkeley Hundred and the Company and was well known to Sandys. Owing to his status and the respect he commanded, he was put in charge of the college lands as one of the governor’s deputies and added to the colony’s council of state. Passionate about the mission to bring Christianity to the Powhatans, he was critical of settlers’ hostile attitude toward the Indians and advised Sandys and the Company to offer gifts such as clothing and household goods to show their “love and hearty affection.” The way to convert the Indians and win them over to English ways, Thorpe believed, lay in improving their material conditions.

His advice was written into instructions by the Company and issued to the new governor, Sir Francis Wyatt, in July 1621. Governor Wyatt was to take special care that “no injury or oppression” be perpetrated by the English against the Indians “whereby the present peace may be disturbed and ancient quarrels (now buried) might be revived.” He was instructed also to draw the better disposed of the Powhatans into a closer relationship with the English and to reward them accordingly. These converts would be a “great strength” to the English as missionaries for the “more general Conversion of the Heathen people which we so much desire.” Meanwhile, George Thorpe had established a warm relationship with the great chief Opechancanough and was rewarded in the early spring of 1622 with the extraordinary news that the chief and his people were ready to abandon their heathen ways and embrace the Anglican faith. At last, the “perfecting of this happy work,” the English believed appeared to be in reach.<sup>[30](endnotes.md#en0138en)</sup>

IN THE EARLY 1570S, SIR THOMAS SMITH AND HIS SON AND namesake described the many advantages of founding settlements in Ireland in a promotional pamphlet intended to attract support for the venture. English *coloni *(settlers) would cultivate a sparsely populated land, build towns, stimulate commerce, and establish “law, justice, and good order.” The English were unlikely to fall into the barbarous practices of the Irish, Smith wrote, because farming and settled communities would ensure they maintained their virtue. “How say you now,” Sir Thomas asked exuberantly, “have I not set forth to you another Eutopia?”<sup>[31](endnotes.md#en0139en)</sup>

Half a century later, Sandys’s view of Utopia in Virginia shared much in common with Smith’s, especially regarding the effort to create a prosperous, just, and civil society. Although the Company was critical of settlers’ overdependence on tobacco, a buoyant market in London and handsome profits gave great encouragement to merchants and planters alike. From 1619 to 1621, 3,570 settlers had been sent to the colony in forty-two ships, English laws and representative government had been established, and local communities supporting diverse crops and manufactures were expanding all along the James River. To promote education, the Company was committed to the construction of a free school named for the East India Company, which had contributed funds to instruct settlers’ children in “the principles of religion Civility of life and humane learning.” John Ferrar commented that the undertaking was of the “highest consequence unto the Plantations… whereof both Church and commonwealth take their original foundation and happy estate.” Money was raised for the purchase of books for the school and to assist with the tutoring of Indian children. Above all, Sandys and his supporters eagerly awaited the conversion of the Powhatans. Over time, Indians and godly and hardworking English settlers would unite and live under the benevolent care of the Anglican Church. Virginia, a “New Jerusalem,” would be the first Protestant commonwealth in America.<sup>[32](endnotes.md#en0140en)</sup>