---
title: "Chapter One: Jamestown"
type: "reading"
book: "1619: Jamestown and the Forging of American Democracy"
author: "James Horn"
chapter_num: 1
source: "Horn, James - 1619- Jamestown and the Forging of American Democracy.epub"
date_added: 2026-05-25
tags:
  - hist_21103
  - reading
  - 1619
---


# Jamestown

*Chapter One*

We hope to plant a nation,

Where none before hath stood.

*—Richard Rich (1610)*

That no man blaspheme God’s holy name upon pain of death, or use unlawful oaths, taking the name of God in vain… upon pain of severe punishment for the first offense so committed, and for the second to have a bodkin thrust through his tongue.

*—Laws Divine, Moral, and Martial (1609–1611)*

JAMESTOWN WAS UNASHAMEDLY A COMMERCIAL VENTURE. Founded by royal charter in April 1606, the Virginia Company was the latest of a number of trading companies that had blossomed during the previous half century, evidence of the growing wealth and global reach of English, especially London’s, merchants. “*All* Kingdoms,” an anonymous writer pointed out to the secretary of state, Robert Cecil, Earl of Salisbury, “are maintained by Rents or Traffic [trade], but especially by the latter, which in maritime places most flourish by means of Navigation.” Companies enabled sovereigns to promote overseas expansion and commerce while at the same time adopting the convenient fiction that they had little direct involvement in the creation of empire.<sup>[1](endnotes.md#en0010en)</sup>

Led by some of the ablest merchants and statesmen of the day and inspired by a generation of promoters of American colonies, the Virginia Company set out to create a burgeoning transatlantic trade by the establishment of permanent settlements in the Chesapeake Bay and New England regions. Company leaders, including Cecil, were confident that thriving industries could be established in America and products exported back to England, thereby lessening the country’s dependence on imports from Europe and elsewhere. To ensure they had the best possible workers, the Company recruited skilled artisans from England and overseas: Italian glassworkers; Polish and German experts in the production of industrial commodities and valuable minerals; vignerons from Languedoc, France, to cultivate the colony’s vines that had been recently imported from the Canaries. The men were said to be skilled also in the manufacture of silk. John Pory, writing from Jamestown to Sir Edwin Sandys, treasurer and chief promoter of the Company, was especially enthusiastic about the colony’s potential for producing wine (he was reputed to be a heavy drinker). Once vineyards were established, he believed Virginia would yield enough wine to “lade all the ships that come” with vintages as good as those of France and Spain.<sup>[2](endnotes.md#en0011en)</sup>

John Pory was a perceptive man. Educated at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, and connected to the highest ranks of English society, he combined a gift for languages with a taste for travel and diplomacy, having spent several years in Europe and the Levant. As the recently appointed secretary of Virginia, he painted a vivid picture of Jamestown’s fledgling society for Company leaders in London. English plows and cattle, he remarked at the end of September 1619, would soon bring the “Colony to perfection.” The land was marvelously fertile and once tilled would support both a plentiful crop of wheat and abundant Indian corn in a single year. The planting of mulberry trees would lead to a thriving silk industry, while cattle and other livestock were increasing quickly and would be a steady source of income for planters. By adapting English husbandry practices to the new conditions, Pory had no doubt that settlers would “produce miracles out of this earth,” which in turn would supply ample provisions for the hundreds of new arrivals the Company was sending over.<sup>[3](endnotes.md#en0012en)</sup>

Already, considerable fortunes were being made. Tobacco cultivation had spread rapidly over the previous five years as a growing number of colonists took up prime lands along the James River valley and discovered the benefit of the lucrative cash crop. “All our riches for the present do consist in tobacco,” Pory commented wryly, so that even “our Cow-keeper here of James City on Sundays goes accoutered [dressed] all in fresh flaming silks, and a wife of one that in England had professed the black art not of a scholar but of a collier of Croydon, wears her rough beaver hat with a fair pearl hatband and a silken suit.” With tobacco commanding high prices in London, one man had made a profit of £200 in a year from just his own labor. Planters with the help of their field-workers could make much more; a man with six servants had earned £1,000 from one crop, an extraordinary sum considering that a common day laborer in England might earn only £12 annually. Although such returns were unusual, they were nevertheless possible. Here, seemingly, were opportunities for ordinary people to get rich by their own hard work and for the wealthy and well placed to become richer still. No better example could be found than the new governor himself. Sir George Yeardley had first arrived in the colony a decade earlier with little more than his sword, Pory commented, but when in London shortly before returning to Jamestown, he and his lady had spent a small fortune to furnish his forthcoming voyage. It would not be long before the governorship of Virginia, he wrote, would be worth as much as the highly lucrative office of lord deputy of Ireland.<sup>[4](endnotes.md#en0013en)</sup>

The colony was changing dramatically. Several years earlier, Virginia could count only a few hundred settlers living in a half dozen small English settlements, but by the spring of 1620, more than two dozen communities had been established from the mouth of the James River to the falls a hundred miles upriver, and the settler population had quadrupled. Tens of thousands of acres had been taken up by private investors who—with the Company’s blessing—were encouraged to transport their own laborers to the colony, thereby adding to the flow of new arrivals and rapid expansion of settlement. As a consequence of new initiatives introduced by Company leader Edwin Sandys, the country was flourishing, the English were at peace with local Indian peoples, the Powhatans, and Virginia appeared destined for a period of prolonged stability and prosperity.<sup>[5](endnotes.md#en0014en)</sup>

The abundance and prosperity described by Pory were a far cry from the disasters that had blighted Jamestown’s first decade. Among these were the heavy loss of life, lengthy hostilities against the Powhatans, and a desperate lack of profitable returns to investors. Jamestown might well have become another “lost colony” alongside Roanoke had not the immensely influential Earl of Salisbury, the London merchant prince Sir Thomas Smythe, and other prominent leaders, including Sandys, decided to intervene and thoroughly overhaul the organization of the Company and colony in 1608–1609. This first phase of reform was in some respects a foreshadowing of their later attempts to build a true commonwealth—for example, in their emphasis on converting the Indians to the Church of England—but was completely different in regard to governing and leadership. What was required, the Company believed, was the enforcement of law and order by an authoritarian government in Virginia led by an all-powerful lord governor and captain general.

In retrospect, a military regime and martial law proved necessary to sustain the colony through the coming years of war and the immediate aftermath, yet it was not at all conducive to the development of an expansive civilian society necessary for growth and prosperity in postwar Virginia. The formidable challenges of the first ten years played a key role in shaping the comprehensive reforms launched by Sir Edwin Sandys and his supporters in 1619.

IN THE WINTER OF 1606, THE LEADERS OF THE FIRST EXPEDITION to Virginia received a series of detailed instructions, which illustrate the high hopes of the Company on the eve of the venture. The colony was to be governed by a small council of prominent settlers appointed by the Company. Once they arrived in Virginia, they would elect a “president” from among their own number who would oversee the colony for up to a year. The leaders of the expedition were ordered to ensure their initial settlement was located on a prominent river about a hundred miles from the ocean, a precaution to reduce the risk of attack from the sea by a hostile enemy, notably Spain, and to position settlers close to the mountains inland, where the discovery of a passage might lead them through the North American landmass to the Pacific Ocean, believed to be only a few hundred miles from the Atlantic coast. Settlers were also instructed to take advantage of trade with Indian peoples from surrounding regions and to search for any existing gold or silver mines.<sup>[6](endnotes.md#en0015en)</sup>

In the context of the times, these aspirations were quite realistic. The belief that North America had vast riches yet to be discovered was commonplace in Europe by the mid-sixteenth century. Spectacular Spanish discoveries and the pillaging of Indian peoples in the Caribbean, Middle America, and South America had confirmed the existence of enormous wealth in new lands (new to Europeans). A century earlier, the English had been among the first European nations to cross the Atlantic but missed the opportunity to capitalize on their discoveries of the North American mainland, much to the exasperation of early promoters such as Richard Eden. Had we not lacked “manly courage,” he complained, “it might happily have come to pass that that rich treasury called *Perularia *(which is now in Spain in the city of Seville, and so named for that in it is kept the infinite riches brought thither from the newfound land of Peru) might long since had been in the Tower of London, to the king’s great honor and wealth of this his realm.”

During the sixteenth century, Spanish explorers and then the French and English had eagerly turned their gaze upon the northern continent, convinced that just as Mexico and Peru had yielded great treasures, so in time would North America. The Spanish had searched in vain for riches in the southeast and southwest, the French in Florida and the far north, and the English in mid-Atlantic and northern lands. In the 1570s, Martin Frobisher had prospected for gold on Meta Incognita (southern shore of Baffin Island) in the Arctic Ocean, and in the 1580s Sir Walter Ralegh had sponsored three large-scale voyages to the island of Roanoke and adjacent lands on the coast of North Carolina. These efforts had come to nothing. Fifteen years later, at the beginning of the new century, the Virginia Company was determined to try again, this time searching along the shores of the Chesapeake Bay and inland.<sup>[7](endnotes.md#en0016en)</sup>

Despite seemingly promising beginnings, Jamestown settlers were unable to find a passage to the Pacific Ocean, gold or silver in the mountains, or wealth of any kind other than the natural produce of the country. Within days in August 1607, following the return to London of one of the expedition’s leaders, Captain Christopher Newport, rumors that gold had been discovered in Virginia spread like wildfire around the city, only to be followed just as rapidly by news that the samples of ore brought back by Newport were worthless. “Silver and gold they have none,” a well-placed commentator noted simply.<sup>[8](endnotes.md#en0017en)</sup>

Disappointing as the news was for the Company, information that arrived in the spring of 1608 indicated the colony was on the brink of collapse. Disease had carried off the majority of the original 104 men and boys during the previous summer and fall, and the leadership had splintered into bitterly divided factions. Tensions had been high ever since the original voyage to the colony when, a few months after departing England, Captain John Smith, one of the principal leaders, was arrested for challenging the authority of other officers and attempting to make himself “king.” He was cast into the brig and confined below decks for much of the voyage. Following further disruption, he narrowly avoided being hanged when the expedition made landfall on the island of Nevis in the West Indies.<sup>[9](endnotes.md#en0018en)</sup>

Seven months later at Jamestown, another mutiny occurred. The first president of the colony, Captain Edward Maria Wingfield, a veteran of wars in Ireland and the Netherlands, was overthrown by three members of the council on the grounds that he was unworthy to serve and an atheist. In turn, he accused those who had plotted against him of forsaking “His Majesty’s Government” and of planning to establish a “*Parliament*” (my italics), evidently believing his ousters sought to convene a popular government wherein even the lowliest would have a voice—a most dangerous leveling precedent. Wingfield alleged that the new president, John Ratcliffe, and his supporters, including Smith, had overthrown the legitimate authority and imposed a brutal regime of arbitrary rule, threatening and beating anyone who opposed them. By way of an example, he reported that James Read, a blacksmith, who had been condemned to be hanged for striking Ratcliffe, saved himself from the gallows by accusing Captain George Kendall, also recently deposed from the council, of treason. Despite little evidence to prove his guilt, Kendall was convicted a few days later and summarily shot to death. If “this whipping, lawing, beating, and hanging in Virginia” was known in England, Wingfield protested, referring to the breakdown of any semblance of law and order, “I fear it would drive many well-affected minds from this honorable action.”<sup>[10](endnotes.md#en0019en)</sup>

WHETHER OR NOT THE COMPANY’S LEADERS BELIEVED WINGFIELD’S self-justifications, they recognized that within less than a year the colony had degenerated into a half-starved mutinous rabble and the enterprise was in grave danger of foundering. They determined that the colony needed to be thoroughly remodeled. To that end, Company leaders petitioned the king, James I, to grant them extensive new powers.<sup>[11](endnotes.md#en0020en)</sup> Their first charter of 1606, which had established the Company, was superseded by a new charter of May 1609, that reorganized the Company as “the Treasurer and Company of Adventurers and Planters of the City of London for the First Colony in Virginia.” Henceforth, the enterprise was to be governed by a treasurer, who was the leading officer, a ruling council, and ordinary members (called *adventurers*) who would convene regularly in weekly and quarterly meetings. Sir Thomas Smythe, a powerful London merchant and statesman who had played a prominent role in the Virginia venture since its inception, was appointed treasurer, the foremost officer of the Company. Members nominated candidates from among their own ranks to form a new council, which together with the treasurer comprised the standing administration of the Company. Endowed with authority to establish “all manner of laws, directions, instructions, forms and ceremonies of government and magistracy” necessary for the colony, the Company council’s jurisdiction was limited, in theory, only by the important caveat that such ordinances should “as near as conveniently may be, be agreeable to the laws, statutes, government and policy of this our realm of England.”<sup>[12](endnotes.md#en0021en)</sup>

Policy and general oversight of the colony remained firmly located in London under the authority of the Company, but to ensure that Virginia was governed effectively and law and order restored, the Company created a new position, an “absolute Governor,” who would rule in the colony. Sir Thomas West, twelfth Baron De La Warr, a high-ranking nobleman and soldier, was appointed the colony’s first lord governor and captain general, supported by Sir Thomas Gates, another veteran of the wars in Ireland and Europe, who would serve as lieutenant governor. Although the governor would be assisted by an advisory council in the colony of his own choosing, the Company made it clear that he could not be overruled or removed by it.

Under the new regime, the governor or his deputy were given extensive civil and military powers, including authority to enforce martial law and to supplement, revise, or interpret any laws in force in the colony at their own discretion. Mindful of the frequent challenges to former leaders at Jamestown, governors were instructed to deploy a strong personal guard both to “beget reverence to [for] your authority” and to remind colonists to “obey the gravity of those laws under which they were born.” In matters of civil justice, he was advised to act more like a chancellor than a judge, “rather upon the natural right and equity than upon the niceness and letter of the law which [might be] perplexing in this tender body.” The Company encouraged him to “discreetly” combine “a summary and arbitrary way of justice” with more traditional forms of magistracy as is best suited “for you and that place.”<sup>[13](endnotes.md#en0022en)</sup>

The outcome was the colony’s first legal code, the *Laws Divine, Moral, and Martial,* drafted by William Strachey, the newly appointed secretary of the colony, and expanded by Gates and then his successor Sir Thomas Dale. It laid out in plain language the duties of settlers and soldiers and itemized punishments for transgressions. The “Divine” and “Moral” components of the code emphasized obedience to God and church. Settlers were to attend services twice daily, in the morning and evening, summoned by the tolling of the church bells. Anyone who did not attend divine service or persistently blasphemed God’s holy name or called into question the reputation of a preacher or minister would be punished by whipping, having their tongues bored through with a bodkin (a long, blunt needle), or by death. With regard to serious crimes—treason, murder, the rape of English or Indian women, theft, embezzlement of Company property, trading with the Indians without permission, or running away to the Indians—the punishment was also death.

Measures aimed at regulating relationships with the Indians were a reflection of the Company’s continuing hope to convert the Powhatans to Christianity and English ways. Other transgressions such as slandering the Company or its leaders, killing livestock, and fornication carried the penalties of whippings, branding, loss of ears, galley service, which meant serving at the oars of longboats, and pleas for forgiveness in front of the congregation assembled in church. Additional sections set out the martial laws, pertaining to military service and therefore the great majority of men, which carried equally severe punishments. By these means, Gates and Dale determined not only to restore order but also to bring about the moral reform of their men and settlers generally. Jamestown and other garrisons to be established along the James River were to be ruled by military laws as well as strict religious principles.<sup>[14](endnotes.md#en0023en)</sup>

To achieve their plans, Smythe and his advisors completely overhauled the Company’s financial organization and created a joint stock enterprise whereby anyone prepared to invest in the general stock or to put themselves forward to go to the colony in person was eligible to join the venture. Company’s leaders cast their recruitment campaign far and wide throughout England. In the spring, they issued a newssheet to be distributed in London that encouraged skilled artisans and tradesmen to join them. Even at this early stage, the Company promoted a range of skills to create a productive and diversified economy in Virginia. Efforts were made to attract men and women as well as foreign workers “of whatever craft they may be,” who were instructed to make their way to Smythe’s city house to register for the voyage. In return for signing up, prospective settlers were promised dwelling houses, vegetable gardens and orchards, as well as food and clothing at the Company’s expense, together with a share in the division of land after seven years.

Appeals for financial support were forwarded to city and merchant leaders around England. Contrary to the true state of affairs, letters sent by the Company to merchants throughout the country in early 1609 described in rosy hues the achievements of early settlers in creating a firm foundation for the colony’s future prosperity. They had discovered a bounteous country that was “safe from any danger of the Savages or other ruin that may threaten us.” Letters listed examples of the many valuable commodities available in Virginia and potential industries that would be established, and expressed “no improbable hope” of finding rich mines.

The success of the campaign can be measured by the alacrity with which members of the aristocracy and gentry, merchants, and ordinary working men and women joined the venture. By the time the Company received royal approval for its new charter, 55 London mercantile and guild companies and 619 individuals had invested in the Company, thousands of pounds had been raised, and hundreds of colonists had been recruited. Fundamental organizational and financial reforms had been put in place that would persist throughout the Company’s management of the colony.<sup>[15](endnotes.md#en0024en)</sup>

Company leaders summarized their objectives to Lieutenant Governor Sir Thomas Gates shortly before he left for Jamestown. Four major priorities were identified that they believed would lead to continuing investment and commercial success: (1) the discovery of either “the south seas or royal [valuable] mines”; (2) trading with Indian peoples near and far who were accessible by water; (3) tribute from local Indians; and (4) the production of natural commodities. The governor was instructed to select a new site for the colony’s capital away from major navigable rivers and therefore safe from attack by Spanish warships. The Company believed Jamestown was poorly located and vulnerable to Spanish attack and had therefore decided to reduce it to a small garrison. Three Indian towns—one at the falls of the James River (possibly the village of Powhatan in present-day Richmond), and Ohonahorn and Ocanahowan to the south in what is now North Carolina—were to be occupied and developed as major new settlements instead. They would be the destination for the hundreds of settlers who were gathering in London and elsewhere waiting to board ships that would carry them to a new life in Virginia.<sup>[16](endnotes.md#en0025en)</sup>

As well as strengthening their political and financial powers, Company leaders acted to transform the entire scale of the Virginia enterprise. No longer seen as a private commercial venture, in the latter half of 1608 and early months of 1609 Sir Thomas Smythe and his advisors expanded Company efforts into a national undertaking of, as they saw it, immense consequence to England’s honor, virtue, and future success. Their vision was articulated in the opening months of 1609 by Robert Johnson, an important London merchant and deputy treasurer of the Company, and represented a first major phase of reform that anticipated some of Sandys’s initiatives introduced ten years later.

In an influential promotional tract entitled *Nova Britannia,* Johnson exclaimed that the land the English had “searched out, is a very good land” and “if the Lord love us, he will bring our people to it, and will give it us for a possession.” He lavished fulsome praise on Virginia, describing an extensive country with a pleasant climate, well-watered valleys and plains, and hills and mountains where “hidden treasure, never yet searched” was yet to be discovered. Throughout the country, there were infinite varieties of game, fish, and fowl, as well as an abundance of all sorts of trees, covering the land in an immense woodland. He explained that the produce of the colony would supply a great variety of goods to the “great service” of England: timber, copper, and iron; vines to produce wine; mulberry trees for silk manufacture; hemp and flax for cordage and linen; pitch, tar, turpentine, and soap ashes for industries. Establishing manufactures in Virginia and transporting the country’s natural produce to England would encourage the growth of a strong mercantile marine. At the same time, England would be able to put the idle and unwanted poor to profitable work in America, for both their own benefit and the country’s. Eventually, England would become self-sufficient in raw materials and be able to supply manufactured goods as well as Virginia’s produce to the rest of Europe.<sup>[17](endnotes.md#en0026en)</sup>

Johnson’s approach was greatly influenced by an earlier promotional work authored by Thomas Hariot, polymath and advisor to Sir Walter Ralegh during the Roanoke voyages twenty years earlier. In 1588, Hariot had published *A Brief and True Report of the New Found Land of Virginia,* whose comprehensive description of the natural resources of the Roanoke region and lands to the south of the Chesapeake Bay read like a merchant’s dream.*A Brief and True Report* remained the most authoritative and detailed account of an English colony in America, so it’s no surprise that in the winter of 1608–1609, Hariot, one of the few men alive to have explored the North Carolina littoral, was called upon by Sir Thomas Smythe to join discussions about the future of the colony. He and another of Smythe’s advisors, Richard Hakluyt the younger—a prolific writer and leading advocate of American ventures—were vigorous advocates for enlarging Virginia by connecting the Roanoke region to the James River valley.<sup>[18](endnotes.md#en0027en)</sup>

Accordingly, the Company petitioned the king to extend the colony’s bounds two hundred miles north and south of the original settlement area stipulated in the 1606 charter, and inland from “sea to sea.” King James granted their request, and as a result, the Virginia Company controlled an area along the Atlantic seaboard that extended from near modern-day Cape Fear, North Carolina, to the head of the Delaware Bay, close to where Philadelphia would be founded seventy years later. Westward, the colony extended to the Pacific Ocean.

Lastly, in a political and promotional masterstroke, Company leaders closely associated the colony’s seemingly bright prospects with the transcendent vision of a Protestant crusade to convert Indian peoples to Christianity. In a series of sermons in London sponsored by the Company, preachers exhorted settlers to cross the ocean and spread the light of the true faith into the dark corners of a heathen and savage land, “even where Satan’s throne is.” What “comfort to those subjects who shall be a means of furthering of so happy a work,” the Reverend Richard Crakanthorpe declared, “not only to see a New Britain in another world, but to have also those as yet heathen barbarians and brutish people… to learn the speech and language of Canaan?” The Reverend William Symonds was confident that Virginia would grow into a country “formidable to all the enemies of Christ, and be the praise of all that part of the world.” Robert Johnson, aware that Spain had been hugely successful in spreading Catholicism among the Indian peoples of Spanish America, exhorted all well-affected subjects to adventure their purses or persons to support the new colony and “spread the kingdom of God, and the knowledge of the truth, among so many millions of men and women, Savage and blind, that never yet saw the true light shine before their eyes.”

Conversion of the Indians would lead to a blossoming of the Church of England in a new land and the establishment of a Protestant empire in North America that would serve as a mighty bulwark against Spain’s vast Catholic dominion in the south. “Thus shall we honor our God, our religion, our Nation,” London preacher William Crashaw proclaimed grandly. Taking the true church to Virginia endowed settlers with a divine mission. The Company’s council encouraged the undertaking by assuring investors and settlers that the “eyes of all Europe are looking upon our endeavors to spread the Gospel among the Heathen people of Virginia, [and] to plant our English nation there.” Jamestown was to be England’s first godly society in America.<sup>[19](endnotes.md#en0028en)</sup>

A DEFINING CHARACTERISTIC OF EARLY AMERICA WAS THE EXTRAORDINARY diversity of peoples. Before arriving in Virginia, few English settlers had encountered Indians, but many would have heard about them from tales of “remote and unknown Countries,” plays that popularized the image of the Indian, or godly works that emphasized the task of civilizing the “savages” and converting them to Anglicanism. Indians might be portrayed as exotic and wild, perhaps offering a glimpse of what ancient Britons had been like before they were conquered and civilized by the Romans. The task of creating an English settlement in Virginia similarly carried the sacred obligation of civilizing the Indians, eradicating savagery, and redeeming them from idolatry. Redemption became one of the central themes of the Company’s colonizing plans, just as it was in the case of English efforts to civilize the “wild” Irish by settling plantations throughout Ireland under way at the same time.<sup>[20](endnotes.md#en0029en)</sup>

**FIGURE 1—**Indian peoples of Tsenacommacah (Virginia). Drawn by Jamie May.

Other than men who had been involved in privateering voyages in the West Indies or fishing in the northern Atlantic, the majority of settlers had never seen Indians and were likely unsure about what to expect from them. The Virginia Company offered advice that suggested a guarded approach, friendly (or at least not antagonistic) but cautious, which reflected the English experience with Indian peoples during the short-lived Roanoke colonies twenty years earlier. Though they lived side by side, colonists established their own settlements along the James River, and Indian peoples lived separately according to their own laws and customs in communities on tribal lands ruled by local chiefs.

Tsenacommacah, the Indians’ name for Virginia, was home to approximately fifteen thousand Powhatan people who lived in several hundred communities scattered across the land from south of the James River northward to the Potomac River and from the shores of the Atlantic to the gently rolling hills of the piedmont, where hostile Siouan-speaking peoples halted expansion farther west. In the 1570s, Wahunsonacock, great chief of the Powhatans, had inherited six districts located between the upper James and York Rivers that together with two or three more comprised the historic core of his territories. By the beginning of the seventeenth century, he had acquired more than two dozen additional chiefdoms, described by Captain John Smith as “either by force subdued unto him, or through fear yielded.” The English had entered a land inhabited by one of the most powerful Indian chiefdoms of the mid-Atlantic.<sup>[21](endnotes.md#en0030en)</sup>

Wahunsonacock was acknowledged to be a remarkable leader. English accounts describe him in quasi-regal terms. A man of “grave and Majestic countenance,” Captain Smith wrote, “as drove me into admiration to see such state [dignity] in a naked Savage.” “All he knew,” Smith added, were under his rule. William Strachey wondered how a “barbarous and uncivil” Indian chief devoid of the magnificent outer trappings of European royalty could yet express a form of such grandeur as to strike awe not only in his own people but also in the English. Opechancanough, his brother or kinsman, was described in similarly regal terms as “a brave Prince” of noble presence, “perfectly skilled in the Art of Governing.” He was feared, eyewitnesses said, by peoples near and far who dreaded his name.

Yet, in practice, both Wahunsonacock and Opechancanough’s powers were considerably more limited than the English believed. The chiefdom had been pieced together from the 1570s onward by wars, threats, marriage, and diplomacy, which involved granting concessions on the part of the two great chiefs to local rulers and allowing considerable autonomy to especially powerful peoples and to those who lived on the periphery. Far from being a centralized polity ruled by a tyrannical king, Tsenacommacah was a patchwork of differing jurisdictions and districts connected by a variety of relations based on force, kinship, or mutual benefit in varying combinations; diversity was its strength but also its greatest weakness.<sup>[22](endnotes.md#en0031en)</sup>

From the earliest encounters, English-Powhatan relations had been ambiguous. Violence or the threat of violence was ever present, but so too was a desire on both sides to learn about the other and, if conditions were favorable, to trade or perhaps gain an advantage. In late April 1607, on the very first day the settlers made landfall, an exploratory party was attacked by Indians on the southern shore of the Chesapeake Bay, leaving two of the English injured. By contrast, over the next few weeks while the English surveyed the James River, they were received warmly by many of the peoples along its banks. Then, toward the end of May shortly after establishing themselves on Jamestown Island, the English were besieged in a “furious Assault” by a couple of hundred warriors who nearly overwhelmed the new settlement before being beaten back by cannon fire from the ships anchored offshore. Two settlers and several warriors were killed and many injured. Ambivalence and uncertainty characterized English-Powhatan relations for several years, and despite regular meetings between the settlers’ leaders and the two great chiefs, deep distrust persisted on both sides.<sup>[23](endnotes.md#en0032en)</sup>

IN THE SUMMER OF 1609, A LARGE FLEET COMMANDED BY veteran soldier Lieutenant Governor Sir Thomas Gates left England to reestablish Virginia. Six principal ships and three smaller vessels carried approximately five hundred settlers, including as many as eighty women and children, making up one of the largest expeditions to leave English shores for North America. The presence of women and children represented a significant shift in Company policy, which signaled a new expectation that families, rather than single men, would be the basis of self-sustaining, orderly, and stable communities in the colony.

The voyage was largely uneventful until a month and a half after leaving the south coast of England when, on July 25, a massive hurricane turned day into night, scattered the fleet, and caused severe damage to many of the ships. Disastrously, the flagship *Sea Venture,* which carried Gates and the rest of the high-ranking leaders, was separated from the fleet and driven onto reefs surrounding the Atlantic island of Bermuda. The shipwrecked colonists were forced to take refuge on Bermuda for the next ten months until they completed the construction of two small vessels from the ruins of the *Sea Venture* that would successfully carry them across the ocean to Virginia. Meanwhile, the surviving storm-tossed vessels arrived at Jamestown in August, adding 350 battered and weary survivors to the 130 settlers already there.<sup>[24](endnotes.md#en0033en)</sup>

What followed was one of the most harrowing periods in the colony’s history. Much of the food brought by the new arrivals had been spoiled in the crossing, and their remaining provisions, along with what was available at the fort, were quickly consumed. John Ratcliffe reported from Jamestown in early October that the settlers were in “exceeding much need” of food. In a revealing comment, he pointed out that the Indians produced only enough food for their families and had little to trade even if they were so inclined. As for the English, they did not have enough laborers to clear the land and plant crops on a large-enough scale to support the colony’s new arrivals.<sup>[25](endnotes.md#en0034en)</sup>

Conditions among the English deteriorated rapidly. The region remained in the grip of a severe drought, the worst for half a millennium, which led to severe food shortages among the Powhatans as well as the colonists. Efforts by soldiers to take the Indians’ meager supplies by force proved the last straw. When the ships that had arrived in the colony in August left two months later, the Powhatans rose up against the English to “murder and spoil all they could encounter.” Captain John Martin, who commanded a small fort recently constructed on the Nansemond River, abandoned his post and returned to Jamestown. Shortly after Martin’s departure, seventeen men at the garrison mutinied and stole a boat, saying they intended to trade with Indians, but were never heard of again. With supplies running out, another thirteen men sought to bargain for food with the local Nansemond people and were killed. The remainder of the garrison returned to Jamestown, where they were soon joined by men who had suffered heavy losses at a garrison near the falls of the James River. Within a couple of months, attacks by the Powhatans had resulted in the deaths or desertion of approximately 130 settlers.<sup>[26](endnotes.md#en0035en)</sup>

At the end of October 1609, some three hundred men, women, and children were trapped inside Jamestown’s fort. Many of them were already suffering from malnutrition and sickness, and overcrowding and unsanitary conditions allowed pestilence to spread rapidly through the settlement. Even on short rations, the president leader, George Percy, calculated they would not be able to support themselves for more than a few months, which would leave them entirely without food in midwinter. The Powhatans, well aware of the colonists’ desperate circumstances, besieged the island, killed the settlers’ livestock roaming in the woods, and waited for the settlers to perish. In desperation, starving settlers consumed the small amounts of fish they caught and also devoured their horses, dogs, cats, rats, and mice. When these ran out, they ate their boot leather, starched ruffs, and other trash. Some went out beyond the palisade into the woods to “feed upon Serpents and snakes and to dig the earth for wild and unknown Roots” where they were cut off and slain by Indians. Looking “ghastly and pale in every face,” Percy recalled, “nothing was spared to maintain Life and to do those things which seem incredible, as to dig up dead corpses out of graves and to eat them, and some have Licked up the Blood which had fallen from their weak fellows.” Some who died in their beds were eaten by those who took up their bodies; others were killed by Powhatan warriors trying to escape the horror within the fort. Traditional markers of English civility, what they considered distinguished them from “savages,” degenerated. No story, William Strachey observed, “can remember unto us, more woes, anguishes, then these people [the English], thus governed have both suffered and pulled upon their own heads.” (He evidently believed the settlers were partly to blame for their own misfortunes.) When relief finally arrived in May 1610, only sixty sickly English remained alive at Jamestown, so emaciated they looked like cadavers.<sup>[27](endnotes.md#en0036en)</sup>

War with the Powhatans was disastrous for the settlers and the Virginia Company alike. Hostilities, vicious and protracted, took the form of pitched battles, skirmishes, ambushes, sieges, and brutal murders, which over the next five years led to the deaths and maiming of hundreds of English settlers and Powhatan men, women, and children. Indian communities were destroyed and prime Indian farming lands ruined. War wrecked the Company’s carefully laid plans for Virginia’s rapid commercial development, ruined prospects for expansion to the south of the James River into the Roanoke region, and forced Gates and subsequently Lord De La Warr and Sir Thomas Dale to focus their energies on defeating the Indian enemy rather than on profitable enterprise and the building of stable, orderly communities.

During the summer of 1610 the English retaliated, determined to wreak havoc. Reinforced by the hundreds of settlers and soldiers who had recently arrived with Lord De La Warr, the English attacked Indian communities with a systematic ferocity the Powhatans had never before experienced. De La Warr and Gates adopted scorched earth tactics, reminiscent of recent wars against the Catholic Irish. Moving troops by ships along the James River valley, soldiers shot or put to the sword Indians of all ages and both sexes, despoiled their houses and temples, and cut down and carried away their corn and plantings. The cruelty perpetrated by both sides was shocking even to battle-hardened soldiers and warriors.<sup>[28](endnotes.md#en0037en)</sup>

The appalling violence ebbed and flowed for another three years. Lord De La Warr, taking most of his ablest men, established a fort upriver at the falls in the heartland of the Powhatans’ chiefdom, where fierce fighting pinned down the English during the winter. Chronic sickness forced De La Warr to return to England in the spring of 1611, but in May another seasoned veteran of the wars against the Irish and Spanish, Sir Thomas Dale, arrived with 300 men, bringing the total English population to approximately 750. Dale replaced Gates as the colony’s leader and immediately set about rebuilding Jamestown, fortifying the garrisons at the mouth of the James River, and dispatching more than half the new English arrivals fifty miles upriver to the Indian town of Arrohattoc, where they laid out a spacious new settlement that Dale named Henrico in honor of his patron, Prince Henry, the heir to the throne. Following the Virginia Company’s instructions, Henrico was to be the principal English settlement, “a convenient, strong, healthy, and sweet seat,” secure from attack by Spanish warships, which the English rightly judged a persistent threat, and nearer to the mountains where precious minerals might be found. Dale was confident that gaining control of the James River from its mouth to the falls and establishing settlements at strategic locations along its banks would “so over master” the Powhatans that Chief Wahunsonacock would have little choice but to abandon his territories or come to terms with the English and agree to live in peace.<sup>[29](endnotes.md#en0038en)</sup>

The two chiefs were fully aware of English intentions. Years earlier Wahunsonacock had told Captain John Smith that the settlers had come not to trade but to possess his country. The arrival of hundreds of more colonists with De La Warr, Dale, and Gates together with the establishment of new English settlements, particularly at Henrico and its environs, confirmed the chief’s assessment. For Wahunsonacock and his peoples, the war was no longer an effort to expel the intruders from their lands or contain and control them but had evolved into a struggle for the very survival of Tsenacommacah. Defeat might lead to the breakup of the chiefdom and the Powhatans’ reduction to mere tributary status, subservient to the settlers.

For their part, English leaders in Virginia and London understood that the outcome of the war would strongly influence the success of their entire venture. The future of English America hung in the balance and, as Anglican clerics never tired of reminding Company leaders, so did English hopes of prevailing in their divinely appointed task of converting the Indians to Christianity and the Church of England. This “work [of conversion] is of God,” the Reverend William Crashaw declared, “and will therefore stand.” God was the settlers’ friend and protector. If the English failed, it could only be their fault, a consequence of the settlers’ corrupt and unworthy nature.<sup>[30](endnotes.md#en0039en)</sup>

When it eventually came, the arrival of peace was almost an anticlimax; no decisive battle marked the end of the war but rather a kidnapping that offered a convenient pretext for negotiations. In the spring of 1613, one of Wahunsonacock’s favored daughters, Pocahontas, was abducted by a prominent English mariner and colonist, Captain Samuel Argall, trading along the Potomac River for corn. She was well known to the English from her many visits to James Fort before the outbreak of hostilities and for her friendship with Captain John Smith. Over the next year, her captivity at Jamestown was a vital bargaining chip in talks between Wahunsonacock and Dale to bring hostilities to an end, the English offering to return her in exchange for stolen weapons, English prisoners, and a “ship full of Corn.” Perhaps to the English commander’s surprise, the great chief eventually agreed to terms that were sufficient to satisfy both sides and to allow both to conclude an agreement without losing face. After years of killings, destruction of settlements, slaughter of livestock, and despoiling of crops, both sides, the English hoped, could look forward to living in harmony.<sup>[31](endnotes.md#en0040en)</sup>

IN EARLY APRIL 1614, POCAHONTAS, NOW CHRISTENED REBECCA, wed gentleman-planter John Rolfe before the chancel rail of Jamestown’s first church, sealing the new peace accord. But neither the English nor the Powhatans fully comprehended the union’s implications. Wahunsonacock had grudgingly come to accept that his warriors were unable to rid his lands of the invaders in the near future, yet he had not capitulated and did not view his people as a conquered nation. The truce, as he saw it, was just as beneficial to the English as it was to him. Both sides were exhausted, and he may have interpreted the alliance brought about by his daughter’s marriage as an agreement by the English to not expand their settlements any farther and to coexist on equal terms. Marriage alliances, after all, were a familiar aspect of Powhatan diplomacy in building relationships and forging alliances with neighboring peoples.

English leaders, especially Sir Thomas Dale, on the other hand, viewed the peace quite differently. The English had beaten back Powhatan attacks, consolidated their hold on the James River valley, and entered into independent alliances with several peoples of the Powhatan chiefdom, undermining the influence of the great chief. The conversion of Pocahontas and her subsequent marriage to an Englishman seemed to presage success in the great work of bringing the Powhatans to Christianity. The “knowledge and true worship of Jesus Christ,” Rolfe wrote, would bring “1000s of poor, wretched, and misbelieving people: on whose faces a good Christian cannot look, without sorrow, pity, and commiseration” to the true faith. God’s house could now be erected in a new country by a people divinely appointed to possess it.<sup>[32](endnotes.md#en0041en)</sup>

More tangibly, the Virginia Company anticipated the end of hostilities would promote long-hoped-for commercial success. Virginia’s potential could not be doubted. “Let me tell you all at home this one thing, and I pray remember it,” Dale wrote forcefully to Sir Thomas Smythe, “if you give over this country and lose it, you with your wisdoms will leap [at] such a gudgeon [false bait] as our state has not done the like since they lost the Kingdom of France… The more I range the country the more I admire it. I have seen the best countries in Europe: I protest to you before the Living God, put them all together, this country will be equivalent unto them if it be inhabited with good people.” Besides a variety of natural commodities, industrial commodities such as pitch, tar, potashes, and charcoal were being produced, and some planters were beginning to cultivate new goods such as silk grass, hemp, and tobacco. John Rolfe had been experimenting with tobacco seeds brought from Bermuda (and possibly the Spanish West Indies) for a couple of years to create a strain of Virginia leaf palatable to English taste. Anyone could grow it, the influential planter Ralph Hamor wrote, and he judged a crop would provide sufficient profit for all the planters’ needs with relatively little labor.<sup>[33](endnotes.md#en0042en)</sup>

But despite Company hopes, the colony’s fortunes continued to languish. John Chamberlain, Jacobean London’s busy correspondent and court observer, spoke for many dissatisfied investors when he observed that “I hear not of any other riches or matter of worth, but only some quantity of Sassafras, tobacco, pitch, and clapboard, things of no great value.” No “present profit” was to be expected, he concluded. Approximately £30,000 had been spent on the colony since 1609, a vast sum for the time, but by the time Dale set off from Jamestown for England in the spring of 1616, accompanied by Pocahontas/Rebecca, John Rolfe, their baby son, Thomas, and an entourage of Powhatans, there had been very little return. The enormous effort and expense of outfitting the expeditions of Gates, De La Warr, and Dale, involving some two dozen ships carrying 1,300 soldiers and settlers between 1609 and 1611, together with the failure of various Company schemes to raise support and money in England, had left the Company’s coffers bare.

During the war, the reputation of the colony had sunk so low in London that the Company had been forced to declare that anyone who returned from Jamestown and was discovered spreading “vile and slanderous reports” would be sent back to the colony immediately for punishment. Rumors told of settlers living in such extreme misery that many had abandoned civility and fled to the Indians. It was later claimed that settlers were “Constrained to serve the Colony as if they had been slaves, 7 or 8 years for their freedoms,” and put to “as hard and servile labor as the basest Fellow that was brought out of Newgate.” All of which was “contrary to the express Letter of the King in his most gracious Charter.” The Company, as might be expected, took a very different view. In the midst of war and owing to the poor caliber of many of those recruited, Virginia’s leaders considered they had had little alternative other than to enforce martial law. Dale, for example, had complained bitterly that of the men he had brought with him to the colony in 1611, the great majority were “so profane, so riotous, so full of mutiny and treasonable Intentions” that were it not for their names, it would be doubted they were Christians.<sup>[34](endnotes.md#en0043en)</sup>

The recruitment of new settlers had dried up and the settler population in Virginia dwindled to less than half of what it had been during its high point. Back in London in the summer of 1616, Dale argued that he had “left the colony in great prosperity and peace, contrary to many men’s expectations.” Peace had indeed been achieved, but to assert the colony enjoyed “great prosperity” was a wild exaggeration. A survey by John Rolfe of the same year revealed only 351 settlers living in the colony, scattered in five areas along the James River and one across the bay on the Eastern Shore. A small number, Rolfe remarked, “to advance so great a*Work.*” Consequently, the most pressing need was the recruitment of “good and sufficient men”: the highborn to command, soldiers to make discoveries and defend the colony, and farmers, craftsmen, and laborers to promote profitable enterprises. With such men Virginia would become self-reliant in provisions, valuable commodities might yet be found inland, and towns and shipping built. Many things, he concluded, “might come with ease to establish a firm and perfect Commonweal.” While the colony was secured for the time being against the Powhatans, Sir Thomas Smythe and other Company leaders in London were fully aware that if Virginia were to survive, they had to attract significantly more investors and settlers as quickly as possible.<sup>[35](endnotes.md#en0044en)</sup>