---
title: "Chapter Three: First Africans"
type: "reading"
book: "1619: Jamestown and the Forging of American Democracy"
author: "James Horn"
chapter_num: 3
source: "Horn, James - 1619- Jamestown and the Forging of American Democracy.epub"
date_added: 2026-05-25
tags:
  - hist_21103
  - reading
  - 1619
---

1619 

# [*Three*](toc.xhtml#toc-chapter005)

 

# [First Africans](toc.xhtml#toc-chapter005)

 

He brought not anything but 20. and odd Negroes, which the Governor and Cape Merchant bought for victuals (whereof he was in great need as he pretended) at the best and easiest rates they could.*—John Rolfe (1620)*Others not Christians in the Service of the English—

 

Indians in the service of several planters—04

 

Negroes in the service of several planters—32*—General Muster of Virginia (1620)*AT ABOUT THE SAME TIME SIR GEORGE YEARDLEY WAS preparing for the first meeting of the General Assembly, two heavily armed English privateers lay windward of a Portuguese slave ship in the Gulf of Mexico. The privateers were the*Treasurer,*owned by Sir Robert Rich, the Earl of Warwick, and captained by Daniel Elfrith, and the*White Lion,*commanded by Cornishman John Jope. Their meeting may have been by chance, but such associations were common; English privateers often joined forces to cruise the waters of the Caribbean in search of prizes. The slave ship*St. John the Baptist,*commanded by Captain Manuel Mendes da Cunha, had departed Luanda, the capital of Portuguese Angola, earlier that summer carrying approximately 350 African captives bound for Veracruz. As was common with slave ships, she was grossly overcrowded, which—together with a shortage of supplies and drinking water—resulted in appalling conditions on board and the deaths of approximately a third of the Africans en route. In late July or early August, the*White Lion*and*Treasurer*closed in on their prey off the Yucatan coast and engaged in a fierce battle that left all three ships damaged. Jope and Elfrith took approximately fifty-five to sixty Africans as booty and left the battered Portuguese slaver to her fate, setting their course for Virginia where they anticipated taking on provisions and selling the Africans.[1](endnotes.md#en0078en)

 

Piracy was practically the only means by which the English could acquire or trade African slaves in this period. Spanish officials claimed all of the New World as their own and refused to recognize the legitimacy of foreign colonies or allow foreign merchants to traffic in America. For their part, English sponsors of privateering voyages denied Spanish territorial claims and disputed their right to exclude them from sailing the high seas and trading wherever they wished. Warwick, for example, had sent ships from Bermuda and Virginia over the course of several years to rove in the West Indies in search of treasure or trade. He was only the most recent of a long line of Englishmen stretching back more than half a century to the days of John Hawkins, Francis Drake, and Sir Walter Ralegh who had profited enormously from pillaging Spanish ships and American settlements. Since the mid-sixteenth century, mariners, together with the English lords and merchants who sponsored them, were well aware of the huge numbers of Africans taken forcibly as enslaved laborers to work in the cane fields, on the wharves of bustling ports, or in silver mines of Spanish America. Termed*pieces*by Portuguese traders who had been trafficking along the west coast of Africa since the mid-fifteenth century, English mariners also viewed sub-Saharan Africans as slaves and had few qualms about treating them as a valuable form of plunder.[2](endnotes.md#en0079en)

 

The*White Lion*was the first of the privateers to arrive in Virginia. “About the latter end of August,” John Rolfe reported to Sir Edwin Sandys,

 

a Dutch man of War of the burden of 160 tons arrived at Point Comfort, the Commander’s name Capt. Jope, his Pilot for the West Indies one Mr. Marmaduke, an Englishman. They met with the*Treasurer*in the West Indies, and determined to hold consort ship hitherward, but in their passage lost one the other. He brought not anything but 20. and odd Negroes, which the Governor and Cape Merchant bought for victuals (whereof he was in great need as he pretended) at the best and easiest rates they could.

 

The “Dutch man of War” referred to by Rolfe was the*White Lion,*sailing under a letter of marque from Vlissingen (Flushing) in the Netherlands that gave Captain Jope permission to attack and rob Spanish ships and possessions. Spanish authorities dismissed the legitimacy of such letters—they considered privateers no better than pirates—but letters of marque were recognized by several European states hostile to Spain as a means of promoting attacks on Spanish shipping. Jope’s papers from Vlissingen may account for Rolfe identifying the*White Lion*as Dutch, or he may have had his own reasons to obscure the ship’s true name and English origins. In any event, Rolfe is clear that Sir George Yeardley and the Company’s cape merchant, Abraham Piersey, traveled downriver to meet the ship at Point Comfort, near Kecoughtan, which suggests they knew about the Africans on board. It is no coincidence that a few years later the two of them were recorded in a census as owning the majority of the captives.[3](endnotes.md#en0080en)

 

The “20. and odd” were the first documented Africans to arrive on the mainland of English North America. Shortly after, the*Treasurer*anchored off Point Comfort but did not stay long. Again, Rolfe provided an account of what happened:

 

Three or 4 days after the*Treasurer*arrived. At his arrival he sent word presently to the governor to know his pleasure, who wrote to him, and did request myself, Lieutenant Pearce [Pierce], and Mr. Ewens to go down to him, to desire him to come up to James City. But before we got down he had set sail and was gone out of the Bay. The occasion hereof happened by the unfriendly dealing of the Inhabitants of Kecoughtan, for he was in great want of victuals, wherewith they would not relieve him or his Company upon any terms.

 

The real reason why Captain Elfrith left so abruptly, as Rolfe well knew, was because Governor Yeardley had received instructions from Sir Edwin Sandys in London to detain the ship and question Elfrith about his involvement in acts of piracy in the Spanish Indies sponsored by his patron, the Earl of Warwick. Sandys’s determination to prevent privateers using Virginia as a base from which to mount raids on the Spanish West Indies reveals a serious rift in the Virginia Company’s leadership. He disagreed profoundly with Warwick about the role English colonies should play in the New World. Sandys’s plans centered on the creation of a settler society in Virginia that would benefit from forward-looking governmental, religious, and economic policies; Warwick favored establishing societies such as Bermuda that would profit from commerce and privateering. Had Sandys subscribed to Warwick’s view, far more Africans would have likely arrived in Virginia in these years.

 

Despite his rapid departure from Point Comfort, however, circumstantial evidence points to Elfrith selling or exchanging some of the Africans before leaving port. Just as Yeardley and Piersey had bought most of the Africans from Jope a week or so earlier, William Pierce and Captain Ewens (Evans), sent downriver from Jamestown by the governor to meet the*Treasurer,*also later had a couple of Africans in their households. It seems clear that more Africans arrived in the colony in early September 1619 than the twenty or so reported by Rolfe, possibly including a woman named Angela who in the mid-1620s was living in Pierce’s household.[4](endnotes.md#en0081en)

 

After leaving the Chesapeake Bay, Elfrith set his course for Bermuda, where he would meet with a friendlier reception from officials aligned with the Earl of Warwick than he had received in Virginia, and traded twenty-nine Africans in return for provisions. There, the Africans were held under lock and key before being sold or put to work by Governor Nathaniel Butler on lands belonging to the Bermuda Company. In poor condition, the*Treasurer*remained in port and did not put to sea until February 1620, when she returned to Virginia with a few English passengers and about half a dozen Africans on board. After arriving in the colony and disposing of her passengers, the ship—rotten and unseaworthy—sank (or was scuttled) in a creek off the James River. These Africans, together with “the 20. and odd” and any others purchased from the*Treasurer*previously in September, made up the thirty-two “Negroes” listed in a colony-wide census the following month.[5](endnotes.md#en0082en)

 

NEW EVIDENCE HAS RECENTLY COME TO LIGHT THAT OFFERS a clearer understanding of the origin of the first Africans before they were forced to board the*St. John the Baptist.*They were not already enslaved workers who had been living in the Spanish Caribbean, as some historians had previously surmised, but rather came from West Central Africa, most likely from the Christian Kingdom of Kongo and the neighboring province of Ndongo. We now know also that they had been captured by the Portuguese during a period of intense warfare and arrived in the colony as slaves.[6](endnotes.md#en0083en)**FIGURE 5—**West Central Africa, 1619. Drawn by Jamie May.

 

In the early seventeenth century, West Central Africa was a highly diverse region politically and culturally that stretched approximately five hundred miles along the Atlantic coast from the Kingdom of Loango and Congo River in the north to Benguela and the Kunene River Valley in the south. Inland, extending several hundred miles, the region embraced broad coastal lowlands, fertile river valleys, and massive highlands in the interior rising to over four thousand feet in places. Kongo, a large centralized kingdom, dominated the region. Its core was the densely inhabited lands along the Congo River valley and highlands in the interior around the capital, but during the fifteenth and early sixteenth centuries, its borders expanded considerably to embrace smaller states to the east and along the coast as far south as the island port of Luanda. Across the same period, other powerful kingdoms emerged also, such as Loango northward beyond the Congo River bordering the coast, Benguela far to the south, and Ngola (from which the name*Angola*is derived) that included the rising power of Ndongo in the highlands.

 

Portuguese traders first arrived on Kongo’s coast in the 1480s, sparking a remarkable and lengthy period of cultural exchange. Kongo was a well-established and powerful kingdom, and its rulers actively encouraged close relations with Portugal on equal terms in pursuit of mutually beneficial commerce and access to European technology and knowledge. Within a generation, the Kongolese had espoused their own distinctive form of Catholicism, constructed churches, established schools to encourage literacy among the elite, and entered into diplomatic dealings with the Portuguese. Lesser states such as Ndongo and provinces to the south were inclined to be more cautious, fearing subjection and conquest by the Europeans, but nevertheless favored alliances with the Portuguese to buttress their military strength and independence.[7](endnotes.md#en0084en)

 

One common objective of paramount importance shared by Portuguese and African traders alike throughout West Central Africa was the opportunity to profit from the immensely lucrative slave trade. The slave trade drew the Portuguese into ever-closer relations with African rulers all along the west coast, and for their part, Africans were drawn more and more into the Portuguese orbit of Atlantic commerce. The capture and sale of human beings was not introduced by Europeans—it was embedded in African culture and consequently had a long history—but the alliance with Portuguese merchants greatly expanded and extended the slave trade, bringing riches to ruling kings and merchants alike. In the early sixteenth century, Kongo was exporting two thousand slaves annually, primarily to southern Europe and São Tomé, Portugal’s Atlantic island off the equatorial coast of Central Africa, where the rapid growth of sugar production relied on enslaved labor. By 1600, the number of enslaved workers sent from Angola to the Americas and elsewhere annually had more than doubled. Little wonder that to promote their own interests in the trade and to advance military alliances, the rulers of Ndongo, Benguela, and Loango each established their own relationships with the Portuguese. These partnerships were advantageous at first but would ultimately prove disastrous.[8](endnotes.md#en0085en)

 

For close to a century, relations between Portuguese settlements and African kingdoms in the region, notably Kongo, were based on reciprocal benefits. But in 1571, Sebastian I, king of Portugal, abruptly switched policy and commanded his military forces in Angola to carve out a discrete Portuguese colony from Ndongo and bordering areas to the south that would be ruled directly by the crown. The new territory would become known as Portuguese Angola. King Sebastian justified this dramatic change in direction by his sincere wish to promote the “Holy Faith and Holy Evangelization,” although profiting further from the slave trade was also likely on his mind. Brutal military campaigns over the next twenty years gravely undermined the Ndongo kingdom and paved the way for the subsequent ruinous wars of the seventeenth century.[9](endnotes.md#en0086en)

 

The immediate background to the capture of the men and women who ended up enslaved in Virginia was the appointment of Luis Mendes de Vasconçelos as governor of Angola in 1617. After conventional European tactics failed to achieve military victory, he enlisted companies of Imbangala, called Jagas, ruthless mercenaries who banded together in their thousands to plunder one area after another. Originating in the central highlands of Angola in the last quarter of the sixteenth century, they spread terror and misery throughout the region by their indiscriminate killing, rape, and cannibalistic rituals. Following incursions by Imbangala fighters, whole provinces were left devastated. Fields and valuable palm tree groves were ruined, livestock killed, villages plundered, and people murdered or enslaved. Portuguese clerics and missionaries looked on with shock. Instead of shunning the Jagas, Bishop Manuel Bautista Soares only complained to Spain’s Philip III in 1619 that Governor Mendes had forged alliances with them, killing and “capturing innumerable innocent people, not only against the law of God but also against the expressed regulations of your Majesty.” During Mendes’s decisive campaigns of 1618–1619 in Ndongo, Portuguese and Imbangala forces completely overwhelmed Ndongo’s defenses and quickly captured the capital, Kabasa. Both the city and the region’s rich agricultural lands were plundered mercilessly. So many people were slaughtered, a contemporary wrote, that the rivers became spoiled and huge numbers of people were enslaved “without cause.”

 

Most of those captured by the Portuguese were from large towns and heavily populated rural communities in the royal district around Kabasa between the Lukala and Lutete Rivers. Mendes’s “Angolan conquista” was likely the origin of many of the enslaved men and women who ended up in Virginia and Bermuda. If so, historian John Thornton suggests, captives from Kabasa and surrounding areas would have shared a strong sense of their own cultural identity. They spoke a common language, Kimbundu (“ambundu”), came from an area where they felt strong allegiance to the king and his court, held common religious or spiritual beliefs, and had survived the same hardships of war and capture. It is possible also that some of the enslaved who eventually ended up in English America came from areas closer to Luanda or from a region east of the Kongolese capital, São Salvador, where Portuguese forces and the Imbangala wreaked havoc in 1618 and 1619. This kind of chaos was advantageous to the Portuguese, who were able to enslave victims caught up in the wars and at the same time consolidate their hold on the region.[10](endnotes.md#en0087en)

 

Enduring terrible conditions, captives were tied together in long lines and forced to trek hundreds of miles from the interior to the Atlantic coast and Luanda. The sheer number of new captives overwhelmed port authorities in 1618 and 1619, and thousands had to be held in slave pens that surrounded the town or kept on beaches waiting to be put on board the ships. This was generally the moment when priests would teach the rudimentary principles of Christianity to those not already Catholics. But it is hard to imagine that religious instruction offered much comfort to enslaved men and women who viewed the impending horror of the voyage as a form of prolonged death committed by Portuguese “witches” who might eat them or take them to the “land of the dead” (the Americas). Some died of starvation and sheer fatigue before boarding, and many others perished on the ships waiting to leave port or during the dreadful months of the crossing. Alonso de Sandoval, who wrote about the experiences of the enslaved in this period, observed that captives were chained together when boarding to prevent them from escaping or throwing themselves over the side. At sea, they were packed chained in long rows head to foot below deck “where they saw neither sun nor moon” apart from when they were allowed on deck periodically in small groups for fresh air. Slave ships were frequently grossly overcrowded and did not carry adequate provisions and drinking water for the journey.

 

An account by a former slave, Olaudah Equiano, taken from West Africa (Nigeria) in the mid-eighteenth century provides a graphic illustration of the experience endured by the millions of Africans forced to take the Middle Passage:

 

The stench of the hold while we were on the coast was so intolerably loathsome that it was dangerous to remain there for any time… but now that the whole ship’s cargo was confined together it became absolutely pestilential. The closeness of the place and the heat of the climate, added to the number in the ship, which was so crowded that each had scarcely room to turn himself, almost suffocated us. This produced copious perspirations, so that the air soon became unfit for respiration from a variety of loathsome smells, and brought on a sickness among the slaves, of which many died… This wretched situation was again aggravated by the galling of the chains, now become insupportable, and the filth of the necessary tubs [toilets], into which the children often fell and were almost suffocated. The shrieks of the women and the groans of the dying rendered the whole a scene of horror almost inconceivable.

 

Equiano described a dismal litany of beatings, acts of casual cruelty, and deaths of Africans throughout the voyage. In 1619, thirty-six slave ships left Luanda for Brazil and Spanish America, one of which was the*St. John the Baptist.*During a passage of eleven to twelve weeks, the death rate on slave ships was typically between a fifth and a third of the captives. Tragically, the loss of 120 of 350 slaves on Captain Cunha’s ship by the time she reached Veracruz was by no means exceptional, and more Angolans likely succumbed to disease or exhaustion soon after arrival.

 

By the time the first Africans arrived in Virginia, half a million slaves had already been shipped across the Atlantic to work in Spanish America and Brazil, the majority taken as captives in the vicious wars spawned by the Portuguese in Angola. Hispanic attitudes toward Africans, especially those from sub-Saharan regions, and their development of an Iberian Atlantic slave trading system would play a formative role in shaping English approaches to enslaving Africans from Virginia to Barbados.[11](endnotes.md#en0088en)

 

SEVENTEEN WOMEN AND FIFTEEN MEN FROM NDONGO OR Kongo (hereafter referred to as Angolans) lived in Virginia in early 1620. They were described, together with four Powhatans, as simply “Others not Christians in the Service of the English” and “Negroes in the service of several planters,” with no further details. Four years later, only twenty-one Angolans were recorded, half of whom were residents at Flowerdew Hundred, a large plantation owned by Abraham Piersey on the south side of the James River a dozen miles from Jamestown. The following year, another muster provides more details. Twenty-three Angolans were listed: seven at Piersey’s plantation, made up of four men, two women, and a baby, all unnamed and described as “Negroes”; at Jamestown eight were listed as living in Sir George Yeardley’s household, again all unnamed, five “Negro Women” and three “Negro Men.” Angela, the “Negro Woman [who arrived] in the*Treasurer,*” lived in the house of William Pierce. Nearby, “Edward” worked on Richard Kingsmill’s plantation, and downriver at Warraskoyack in the Puritan Edward Bennett’s household, two Africans remained—“Antonio a Negro,” who was reported as arriving in the*James*in 1621, and “Mary,” who came on the*Margaret and John*in 1622. At Elizabeth City, Anthony and Isabella had a child named “William” after their master Captain William Tucker, who was baptized at the small church near the plantation. Finally, also living in Elizabeth City was an African, possibly an Angolan, named John Pedro who was described as thirty years old and having arrived on the*Swan*in 1623. He lived in the household of Captain Francis West on the Company’s Land, in Elizabeth City, close to the mouth of the James River.[12](endnotes.md#en0089en)**FIGURE 6—**Locations of first Africans in Virginia, 1624-1625. Drawn by Jamie May.

 

Several points stand out in these lists of the enslaved. In 1620, thirty-two Angolans were recorded in the colony, all from the*St. John the Baptist,*representing approximately 3.5 percent of the total settler population. However, five years later, only twenty-three were listed, less than 2 percent of the population, of which at least three were new arrivals and two had been born in the colony. Clearly, the arrival of the first group of Africans did not lead to a surge of slaves into the colony. Second, if the figures are reliable, it is likely that as many as fourteen had died by 1625, approaching half of the initial group. Virginia experienced exceptionally high mortality rates, white and black alike, during this period, owing to the poor health of many newcomers following the Atlantic crossing, the spread of contagious diseases brought from England, and the massive Indian attack of 1622, which alone accounted for the deaths of approximately 350 settlers. Having been forcibly taken from their own war-torn lands, by a malign twist of fate the Angolans found themselves in another country ravaged by war and famine. The emotional and psychological impact of the loss of their compatriots and of finding themselves once again in the midst of conflict is hard to imagine.

 

The census also tells us that from the outset ownership of Africans was dominated by wealthy settlers who controlled large plantations, held important official positions, and consequently acquired the majority of the captives and with a few exceptions held on to them. Most of the enslaved Angolans lived in households that included between four and ten other slaves. Governor Yeardley and Abraham Piersey owned the majority listed in 1624 and 1625, and the remainder were purchased by other high officeholders, burgesses, and wealthy merchants such as Pierce, Bennett, and Tucker, a trend that would continue thereafter. Even at this early stage, Africans were considered exceptionally valuable, more so than servants or tenants. “These Slaves,” Governor Nathaniel Butler of Bermuda wrote in January 1621, referring to the arrival of fourteen Africans on the island the previous year, “are the most proper and cheap instruments for this plantation that can be.” Few in Virginia would have disagreed.[13](endnotes.md#en0090en)

 

The individual experiences of the Angolans would have varied enormously depending on their masters or overseers, where they resided, and the particular nature of their work. Richard Ligon’s description of Barbados a couple of decades later in relation to planters’ treatment of white servants is just as applicable to enslaved Africans in Virginia. How servants fared, he wrote, rested on whether “the master is merciful or cruel; those that are merciful, treat their servants well, both in their meat [food], drink, and lodging, and give them such work, as is not unfit for Christians to do. But if the masters be cruel, the servants have very wearisome and miserable lives.”

 

Africans were involved in all aspects of plantation work: raising tobacco and corn, tending cattle and other livestock, looking after the kitchen garden, and fixing fences and outhouses. For those who had lived in rural communities in Kongo or Ndongo, aspects of their new work in Virginia, such as looking after cattle, may have been similar to the work they did in their homelands, but those who had come from cities or had formerly worked in skilled trades likely found themselves reduced to common laborers unless they were able to adapt their skills to their masters’ demands. Unlike white maidservants who did not usually work “in the ground,” African women were routinely put to heavy labor and frequently labored alongside men in the fields as well as doing arduous domestic chores such as pounding corn. To encourage productivity and cooperation, in rare instances some were given the opportunity to work a small plot of land for themselves for profit and thereby eventually purchase their freedom or that of their children from their owner. But the great majority of Africans in the colony were treated as “perpetual” slaves.

 

Most Africans resided in the main dwelling house along with the planter’s family and white servants, typically in a loft, in a cellar, or wherever they could find space. In a couple of cases, where they lived in large groups, they may have cooked and slept in the planter’s outbuildings close to the dwelling house. For those residing on Yeardley, Piersey, Bennett, and Captain Tucker’s plantations, there would have been plenty of opportunity to spend time with other Africans and possibly too for couples to live together and have children, such as in the case of Anthony and Isabella at Tucker’s plantation. In contrast, for Angela, Edward, and John Pedro, the sole Africans in their respective households, living in Virginia may have initially been a lonely experience. Periodic visits to neighboring plantations, if permitted, would have had to suffice to keep them in touch with their compatriots. Living without the immediate company of other Africans may have encouraged or forced them to integrate more quickly with their white families and neighbors.

 

Considering the majority of Angolans resided in households that included three or more other Africans, they may have been able to keep alive at least some of their cultural traditions, such as languages, regional customs, and spiritual beliefs. Possibly they spoke to each other in Kimbundu—or if from Kongo, in the related Bantu language of that kingdom, Kikongo. Those from Kongo may have shared their form of Catholicism. In some areas of Kongo where trade with Europeans was common, they also adopted to varying degrees the Portuguese language, names, foodways, and manners. Those from Ndongo, on the other hand, likely retained religious beliefs that connected them in a continuous dialogue to their ancestors and spirits who inhabited the other world. It is possible some retained beliefs in “night flying,” during which the person’s spirit wandered freely at night and might occasionally return across the ocean to Angola.[14](endnotes.md#en0091en)

 

THE QUESTION OF WHETHER AFRICANS WERE ENSLAVED when they first arrived in Virginia or were treated similarly to white servants, who made up the bulk of the colony’s labor force down to the 1670s, has generated a great deal of controversy among historians. Did slavery and racial prejudice gradually evolve in Virginia during the half century following the arrival of the Angolans, or did de facto enslavement of Africans begin in 1619?[15](endnotes.md#en0092en)

 

Advocates in favor of the gradual emergence of slavery from forms of initial black servitude have emphasized that Virginia initially lacked any laws clearly defining and providing legal sanction for slavery. Laws in Virginia that unquestionably indicate lifelong service for all African laborers, not just for those who had run away from their owners, did not enter the statute books until the 1660s and 1670s. In addition, some historians point to the evidence of nomenclature: none of the Africans who arrived in the*White Lion*or the*Treasurer,*or who entered the colony later in the 1620s or after, were termed*slaves*. In fact, rather than being identified as slaves, they were listed in the muster of 1625 alongside white servants. Even by 1649, John Ferrar would write that “there are in*Virginia*about fifteen thousand*English,*and of*Negroes*brought thither three hundred good servants.”[16](endnotes.md#en0093en)

 

Perhaps the most telling evidence employed by those who support the theory of the evolution of slavery is the remarkable story of those Africans who against all odds escaped bondage and established themselves as free planters. On the Eastern Shore of Virginia in the 1660s and 1670s, for example, thirteen (ten men and three women) were listed as free householders, nearly a fifth of all the Africans living there. The best known is Anthony Johnson, possibly the same Angolan man as “Antonio” who was listed on Edward Bennett’s plantation in 1625. If so, it appears he married “Mary a Negro Woman” who had lived on the same plantation from 1623. Fifteen to twenty years later, and still enslaved, they moved with their children in the late 1630s or early 1640s to a plantation in Northampton County on the Eastern Shore of Virginia. Over the next couple of decades, the Johnsons achieved their freedom and acquired substantial property, including enslaved Africans. In the mid-1660s, Anthony, Mary, and their extended family moved farther north to Somerset County, on the Eastern Shore of Maryland, where Anthony died shortly after. The possibility that Anthony Johnson was one of the first Africans taken from the*St. John the Baptist*is given credence by Johnson’s son, John, naming a plantation he bought some years later*Angola*.[17](endnotes.md#en0094en)

 

Those Africans who were able to free themselves and their families in this period were extraordinary, yet their experiences contrast starkly with the lives of the vast majority of Africans brought to America, including the first Angolans. As already noted, the English inhabited an Atlantic world where the enslavement of Africans by Europeans was unremarkable. Lagos, Portugal, was Europe’s first African slave trade port and had prospered greatly since the mid-1440s thanks to the profits. Even before trade to America began, thousands of slaves passed through the town’s slave market on their way to Lisbon and Seville. On the arrival of hundreds of slaves in Lagos in 1444, Prince Henry the Navigator (1394–1460), brother of the Portuguese king, commented that he “had no other pleasure than in thinking that these lost souls would now be saved.” Papal bulls issued by the Catholic Church sanctioned the enslavement of sub-Saharan Africans and legitimized the trade as part of their holy mission to convert the heathen, precisely the same reasoning employed to justify the Spanish conquest of America and enslavement of Indian peoples. “In asserting a religious justification for slavery,” historian James Sweet remarks, “the Portuguese and Spanish avoided subjecting the practice to debate.” From their point of view, slavery was a small price for Africans to pay in return for their immortal souls.[18](endnotes.md#en0095en)

 

It is true that indigenous forms of slavery had not existed in England for centuries. Serfdom and villenage, feudal labor systems whereby men and women were bound through descent to particular lordships and manors, persisted but impacted only a small and rapidly decreasing minority of people. The wide-ranging economic changes that swept across much of the lowland countryside in the late fifteenth and sixteenth centuries were unconducive to the persistence of servile labor (“bond men”). In many cases, labor requirements were commuted to particular fees and annual payments. Yet if slavery had long since departed their own shores, English people were aware that a great variety of forms of non-freedom had and still existed throughout the world, such as various types of apprenticeships or service by contract, penal servitude, tales of Christians taken by Muslim pirates and forced to become galley slaves, or in the Bible, which was full of references to the enslavement of peoples. Increasingly, too, the English were becoming aware of the vast numbers of African slaves being shipped to America and parts of Europe. Although it was with pride that the English considered themselves a “uniquely free” people, they lived in a world where the mass enslavement of Africans was resurgent.

 

English people’s attitudes toward the relatively few Africans living in England in this period are unclear. Free and enslaved Africans resided in cities and major ports such as London, Plymouth, and Bristol and worked in a wide range of occupations among the lower and middling ranks of society, although some were highly accomplished and educated in specific occupations. Small numbers also inhabited towns and parishes throughout the realm where they seemingly lived alongside their neighbors with no obvious sign of white prejudice. Only at the end of the sixteenth century, possibly as a result of an influx of “Blackamoors”—people of color usually from North Africa—into London, was any alarm expressed about the number of black residents in Britain, and even in this case it appears the government was far more concerned about a possible threat to public order than were English people.

 

By contrast, depictions of sub-Saharan Africans in travelers’ accounts or popular plays and pageants tended to be extremely negative. They were “a people of beastly living, without a God, law, religion, or common wealth,” wrote Captain John Lok following his voyage to Guinea in 1554, adding descriptions of monstrous black-skinned peoples that were barely human if human at all. Other writers described Africans as wild and savage peoples, some of whom were cannibals “accustomed to man’s flesh” or were as “Libidinous as Apes.” Having translated an account of Africa by the sixteenth-century Spanish Moroccan “Moor” Leo Africanus, John Pory was likely the most knowledgeable man about Africans in Virginia and may have agreed with Africanus’s assessment of Africans as “being utterly destitute of the use of reason, of dexterity of wit, and of all arts.” If English people showed little inclination to discriminate against Africans in their own communities, nevertheless Europeans’ general view of Africa and Africans, especially south of the Sahara, was bleak.[19](endnotes.md#en0096en)

 

The coerced transportation of Africans to America was a major component of the Atlantic commercial world from its beginning, a key driver of the Atlantic system itself. Enslaved Africans were treated as commodities, as a peculiar type of property. John Hawkins, one of the first English traffickers of slaves from Africa to the West Indies, for example, commented that “*Negroes*were very good merchandise in*Hispaniola,*and that store of*Negroes*might easily be had upon the coast of*Guinea.*” English mariners and merchants involved in the Atlantic slave trade recognized the complexity of relationships with Africans along the coasts of West and Central West Africa, which frequently involved dealing with sophisticated African rulers or merchants to acquire captives for shipment, and took for granted African traders’ designation of black captives as slaves. In the slave markets of Africa, Portugal, and Spain, as in Atlantic and American colonies, African captives’ classification as chattel slaves whether by Europeans or African merchants determined their fate and that of their offspring in perpetuity. Such was the chilling effect of the transatlantic trade in African men, women, and children.[20](endnotes.md#en0097en)

 

The absence of legislation formally legalizing slavery in early Virginia does not indicate that the terms by which the first Africans were employed were similar to those of white indentured servants. Specific laws defining slavery in England’s emerging global empire were considered superfluous in the face of long custom and wide usage that accepted the practice. “Slavery,” Jonathan Bush writes, “simply evolved in practice, as a custom, and then received statutory recognition.” The rule of law introduced by Sandys and Yeardley to protect English rights did not apply to Africans, as a matter of course.

 

Apart from expense and availability, nothing prevented settlers from acquiring African slaves from merchants who sometimes brought them to the colony or from claiming absolute ownership on the basis of their assumed property rights. To argue, as does the historian Edmund Morgan, that Africans in Virginia were treated in much the same way as white servants or that English planters were content to absorb them into “a New World community on the English model” is simply unconvincing, as is the opinion put forward by another historian that examples of black experiences similar to the Johnsons’ are to be found throughout the early Chesapeake. If the Eastern Shore of Virginia and Maryland was briefly a haven for a small number of freed blacks such as the Johnsons, very little evidence exists of Africans being freed elsewhere in the colony at any time during the century. A few arrived from England with indentures, and in one exceptional case, a mulatto woman—born of a white father and married to an Englishman—eventually won her freedom following a lengthy period of service and a remarkable legal battle. But that a few Africans came to Virginia as servants, Lorena Walsh emphasizes, “has for too long confused the issue of the fate of the great majority.”[21](endnotes.md#en0098en)

 

The condition of Africans, including the first Angolans, was undoubtedly slavery. On the arrival of the*White Lion*at Point Comfort, John Rolfe reported, “Governor [Yeardley] and Cape Merchant [Piersey]*bought*” (my italics) the Angolans for victuals. The transactional character of the encounter is evident. No mention is made of the length or terms of service, only the terse remark that the Africans were purchased.

 

Six years later, in a significant case that was the first of its kind to come before the General Court, the governor and his council considered what should be done with an African man named “Brase” brought to the colony by Captain Nathaniel Jones. Cruising in the West Indies in early 1625, Jones and his men captured a Spanish frigate and from the small ship took a Portuguese pilot as well as two men, described simply as “a Negro and a Frenchman,” both of whom wished to go with them. Jones had originally intended to make for England, but bad weather damaged their ship and forced them instead to put into Virginia. There, in a disastrous turn of events for the African, the court took upon itself the disposal of the three men. Initially, Brase was sent to work at the plantation of Sir George Yeardley on Jamestown Island, but not long after the court ordered that he “shall*belong*” (my italics) to the governor, Sir Francis Wyatt. To underline the governor’s title to the African the court added that the decision could not be challenged by an earlier arrangement, or “sale,” by Captain Jones to another planter, or any “challenge by the ships’ company.” The judgment, legal scholar Paul Halliday argues, is the first evidence of an English court “disposing of an African’s labor for nonpunitive reasons,” which, he continues, “would have enormous consequences for Brase and for all the Africans who came after him to Virginia.” When Brase had chosen willingly to accompany the English privateers, he had thought they were going to England where he might have hoped to be free; instead, he ended up on Wyatt’s plantation as a slave.[22](endnotes.md#en0099en)

 

No subsequent commentary about the condition of the Angolans or Brase survives, but there is strong circumstantial evidence for their continued enslavement. In the fall of 1627, when Sir George Yeardley wrote his will, he left his wife, Temperance, “the rest of my whole estate consisting of goods, debts, servants, Negars, cattle, or any other thing or things, commodities or profits whatsoever.” Since very few Africans are documented arriving after 1620 and before 1628, it is highly probable that Yeardley’s workers were the same Angolans he had purchased from the*White Lion*eight years earlier. A quarter of a century later, his eldest son, Argoll, still owned two of them, Andolo and Maria, and in 1653 sold two daughters of the couple. Less certain, but possible, is a connection between the Angolans originally acquired by Abraham Piersey in 1619 and some of the “forty*Negro*servants” owned thirty years later by Captain Samuel Mathews. Mathews had married Piersey’s widow and became one of the wealthiest planters in the colony by mid-century, and it’s likely that Piersey’s slaves would have passed first to his wife and then to her new husband. Mathews’s plantation, Denbigh, became a model of industry producing a variety of crops and manufactures that occupied his servants and enslaved African workers.[23](endnotes.md#en0100en)

 

Additional indirect evidence of the early existence of slavery in the colony can be gleaned from other sources: the probate inventories (lists of movable goods) and wills of planters. A study by John Coombs reveals that more than four-fifths of white indentured servants through to 1676 had the number of years remaining of their service mentioned in their masters’ inventories, compared to less than 1 percent of black laborers. The absence of terms of service and the much higher valuations placed on Africans strongly suggests they served for life, unlike poor whites who served fixed-term contracts. Similarly, only one black child out of thirty-three listed in inventories down to December 1662 had his years of service recorded; the rest did not, which implies they had inherited their enslaved status from their parents.[24](endnotes.md#en0101en)

 

The number of Africans in Virginia grew slowly during the first fifty years: a handful arrived in the early 1620s, followed by a large group plundered from an “Angola” ship in 1628, and then a few here and there over the next several decades. In Lower Norfolk County, on the south side of the James River, thirty-three Africans arrived between 1638 and 1650, including four men and one woman sold in 1649 to Captain Francis Yeardley, youngest son of Sir George, to serve “forever.” Throughout the colony, no more than about five to six hundred arrived down to mid-century.

 

Elsewhere in the English Atlantic, however, settlers acquired enslaved Africans with alacrity. On Bermuda, where the first African in English America arrived in 1616, Governor Butler remarked that “Negroes… [were] a most necessary commodity for these islands” for the production of tobacco. Scores of Africans taken from Spanish ships in the West Indies arrived over the next few years. Settlers, Michael Jarvis writes, clearly viewed Bermuda’s Africans “as subordinates whose labor was subject to white appropriation… Legally, black servile status was assumed from the outset.” Planters on Barbados followed suit in the 1630s and quickly passed a law that stated “Negroes and Indians that came here to be sold [that is, were brought to the island] should serve for life unless a contract was before made to the contrary.” When the sugar revolution took hold in the 1640s, Barbados was described as a “flourishing Island” where in a single year planters purchased “no less than a thousand Negroes.” On Providence Island, a Puritan settlement sponsored by the Earl of Warwick in the West Indies in the 1630s, the Company reported that hundreds of “Negroes” were being “procured at cheap rates” and kept “perpetually” as servants. In practical terms, this means that by the mid-seventeenth century, the three essential components of Virginia’s and British America’s evolving plantation system were in place: a commercial crop, large landholdings concentrated in the hands of wealthy elites, and, increasingly, an enslaved labor force.[25](endnotes.md#en0102en)

 

RACIAL PREJUDICE DEVELOPED SIMULTANEOUSLY WITH SLAVERY. The most obvious early evidence is the ubiquitous use by settlers of the Spanish term*Negro*or*Negar*as the sole descriptor of African slaves. The term itself had become virtually synonymous with enslaved sub-Saharan Africans by the sixteenth century. Whereas Virginia’s colony-wide censuses of the mid-1620s identified almost all English settlers by their first and last names, Africans were rarely recorded by name. In the 1624 census, for example, eleven Angolans owned by Abraham Piersey were recorded only as “Negors” or “Negors woman” and “Negors men.” At Jamestown, three were listed, including “Angela” and two unnamed “Negro” women. Elsewhere, seven Angolans were documented only with given names.[26](endnotes.md#en0103en)

 

Early laws regulating Africans’ and whites’ behavior were overtly discriminatory. Officials were forced to clarify their attitudes toward Africans for the first time in 1630 when a white settler, Hugh Davis, was convicted of “abusing himself to the dishonor of God and shame of Christians by defiling his body in lying with a Negro.” According to the authorities, he had sullied himself and disgraced his community by “mixing his Christian body with a heathen one.” To emphasize the point, he was sentenced to be “soundly whipped, before an assembly of Negroes and others” on the next Sabbath day. The court’s judgment reveals that not only did English settlers set themselves apart by skin color but that they were keenly aware of the fundamental distinction of religion—they were Christians whereas they perceived the Africans as heathens.[27](endnotes.md#en0104en)

 

During the next several decades, examples of institutionalized racial discrimination became increasingly common. In 1640, an act passed to encourage the security of the colony stipulated that “All persons except Negroes” should be provided with arms and ammunition. A series of legislative measures systematically discriminated against African women. Planters were obliged to pay taxes on African women over the age of sixteen and their descendants but not on white women, signifying that female Africans were routinely employed to work in the fields—the tax was indicative of the value they were assumed to bring to their owner. A highly significant act passed by the General Assembly in 1662 decreed the status of African or African American children should in the future follow the condition of the mother. In other words, if an Englishman fathered a child with an enslaved African, the child would be accorded the status of a slave. This legislation, historian Kathleen Brown writes, was “a bold attempt to naturalize the condition of slavery by making it heritable and embedding it in a concept of race.” No precedent existed in English law for such a measure.

 

Another important piece of legislation five years later closed any remaining glimmer of hope of freedom for Africans and their children. Henceforth, “the conferring of baptism,” the assembly ruled, “does not alter the condition of the person [that is, slave] as to his bondage or freedom.” This, it was explained, would allow slave owners of good Christian conscience to promote the conversion of the African children in their possession without fear of having their property rights challenged in court. When burgesses in the General Assembly passed a law in 1669 declaring that the casual killing of a slave during corporal punishment would not be accounted a felony, they based their ruling on the assumption that no one would intentionally destroy their own property.[28](endnotes.md#en0105en)

 

How settler prejudice translated into daily life in countless small-scale encounters is less certain. Laws and practice clearly distinguished between white and black experience and the debasement of Africans’ social and legal status intensified as increasing numbers began arriving after 1660. For the English, like other Europeans, individual property rights trumped all other considerations. Nevertheless, in the first four decades at least, given the relatively small numbers of Africans living on plantations scattered along the James River valley, relations among the enslaved and white servants may have been quite relaxed. Subject to similar working conditions, they found themselves sharing much in common. “Racial prejudice,” writes historian Philip Morgan, “was not yet strong enough to stop cooperation between the two. Not only did many black slaves and white servants work alongside one another, but they ate, caroused, smoked, ran away, stole, and made love together.” However, while relations between poor whites and African or African American slaves could be flexible according to particular circumstances, the immutable difference between them, slavery, was not.[29](endnotes.md#en0106en)

 

THE FIRST AFRICANS TO ARRIVE IN MAINLAND ENGLISH AMERICA survived capture in the bloody wars in Ndongo and Kongo, the exhausting march to the sea, starvation and sickness, the horror of the crossing during which many of their compatriots perished, and a fierce attack by two English privateers on the high seas. Yet escape from the*St. John the Baptist*and a future laboring in the fields, ports, or mines of Spanish America did not allow the majority to escape the fate of slavery. Instead, they ended up as enslaved workers on tobacco plantations in Virginia. They were the first of approximately four hundred thousand enslaved men, women, and children forcibly transported to British mainland America and then the United States across two and a half centuries. Their remarkable fortitude and courage, and the rich variety of their African backgrounds and cultural heritage, began to change the social and cultural landscape of America from their first arrival.[30](endnotes.md#en0107en)

 

What happened to one of the first Angolans, Angela, after her fleeting mention in records of the mid-1620s is unknown. She lived in the house of Captain William Pierce in New Towne, Jamestown, rapidly developing as an area of wealthy and well-connected residents. The house was one of the finest in the colony, surrounded by three to four acres where the Pierces planted garden crops and orchard trees. It may have been an experimental garden where a variety of plants promoted by the Virginia Company or brought from the West Indies were cultivated. Angela probably toiled alongside the mistress of the household—William’s wife, Joan—and a young maidservant, Ester Ederife, working in the garden, around the house and yard, and perhaps in the tobacco storehouse nearby. If she had come from an area of Angola where a sizable population of Portuguese settlers lived, she may have already been familiar with some European fruits and crops such as pears, peaches, and onions as well as New World crops such as corn and tobacco.

 

Possibly she, like some other Angolans who arrived in early Virginia, was a Catholic from Kongo, or she might have been baptized by Portuguese priests in a meaningless ritual in the traumatic days prior to taking ship from Luanda. Conversion had no bearing on her condition as a slave, however. Whether she was Catholic or she continued to adhere to her own Central African beliefs mattered little to the English, who recognized neither. No evidence suggests she attended Jamestown’s small wooden church, but if she converted to Anglicanism, she may have occasionally attended divine service, standing with the Pierce family close to where the first General Assembly had met to establish representative government and the rule of law for the English a few weeks before she arrived in the colony.[31](endnotes.md#en0108en)