---
title: "Notes & References"
type: "reading"
book: "1619: Jamestown and the Forging of American Democracy"
author: "James Horn"
source: "Horn, James - 1619- Jamestown and the Forging of American Democracy.epub"
date_added: 2026-05-25
tags:
  - hist_21103
  - reading
  - 1619
---

1619 

# Notes

Introduction: 1619

[1.](introduction.md#en0001) Susan Myra Kingsbury, ed.,*The Records of the Virginia Company of London*(hereafter*RVC*), 4 vols. (Washington, DC: 1906–1935), 3:98–99. An excellent transcription and facsimile of John Pory’s report of the first General Assembly can be found in William J. Van Schreeven and George H. Reese, eds.,*Proceedings of the General Assembly of Virginia, July 30–August 4, 1619*(Jamestown, VA: 1969).

[2.](introduction.md#en0002) Engel Sluiter, “New Light on the ‘20. and Odd Negroes’ Arriving in Virginia, August 1619,”*William and Mary Quarterly*(hereafter*WMQ*), 3rd ser., 54 (1997): 395–398; Linda M. Heywood and John K. Thornton,*Angolans, Atlantic Creoles, and the Foundation of the Americas, 1585–1660*(Cambridge: 2007), 5–7; Kingsbury,*RVC,*3:243.

[3.](introduction.md#en0003) Warren M. Billings,*A Little Parliament: The Virginia General Assembly in the Seventeenth Century*(Richmond, VA: 2004), xvi, 5–10; Christopher Tomlins,*Freedom Bound: Law, Labor, and Civic Identity in Colonizing English America*(Cambridge: 2010), 401–508; Philip D. Morgan, “Virginia Slavery in Atlantic Context, 1550 to 1650,” in*Virginia 1619: Slavery, Freedom, and the Construction of English America,*ed. Paul Musselwhite, James Horn, and Peter C. Mancall (Chapel Hill, NC: forthcoming).

[4.](introduction.md#en0004) See Edmund S. Morgan,*American Slavery, American Freedom: The Ordeal of Colonial Virginia*(New York: 1975), 5–6, 386–387.

[5.](introduction.md#en0005) For a popular and influential account of the Pilgrims, see Nathaniel Philbrick’s best-seller*Mayflower: A Story of Courage, Community, and War*(New York: 2006), 5, passim. Nancy Isenberg critiques the Plymouth myth in*White Trash: The 400-Year Untold History of Class in America*(New York: 2016), 5–8. The quote (not the sentiment) is from Lauren Working, “‘The Savages of Virginia Our Project’: The Powhatan in Jacobean Political Thought,” in*Virginia 1619,*ed. Musselwhite, Horn, and Mancall; Theodore K. Rabb,*Jacobean Gentleman: Sir Edwin Sandys, 1561–1629*(Princeton, NJ: 1998).

[6.](introduction.md#en0006) Rabb,*Jacobean Gentleman,*344–352; Noel Malcolm, “Hobbes, Sandys, and the Virginia Company,”*Historical Journal*24 (1981): 297–321; [Arthur Wodenoth],*A Short Collection of the Most Remarkable Passages from the Originall to the Dissolution of the Virginia Company*(London: 1651), 18–19; Peter Peckard,*Memoirs of the Life of Mr. Nicholas Ferrar*(Cambridge: 1790), 115–116, 144; Conrad Russell,*King James VI & I and His English Parliaments,*ed. Richard Cust and Andrew Thrush (Oxford: 2012); S. L. Adams, “Foreign Policy and the Parliaments of 1621 and 1624,” in*Faction and Parliament: Essays on Early Stuart History,*ed. Kevin Sharpe (Oxford: 1978), 146–147; Andrew Fitzmaurice, “The Company–Commonwealth,” in*Virginia 1619,*ed. Musselwhite, Horn, and Mancall; Alexander B. Haskell,*For God, King, and People: Forging Commonwealth Bonds in Renaissance Virginia*(Chapel Hill, NC: 2017), 187–239.

[7.](introduction.md#en0007) James Horn,*A Land as God Made It: Jamestown and the Birth of America*(New York: 2005), 241–248.

[8.](introduction.md#en0008) Winthrop D. Jordan,*White Over Black: American Attitudes Toward the Negro, 1550–1812*(Chapel Hill, NC: 1968); Alden T. Vaughan,*Roots of American Racism: Essays on the Colonial Experience*(Oxford: 1995); C. S. Everett, “‘They Shalbe Slaves for Their Lives’: Indian Slavery in Colonial Virginia,” in*Indian Slavery in Colonial America,*ed. Alan Gallay (Lincoln, NE: 2009), 67–108.

[9.](introduction.md#en0009) Kingsbury,*RVC,*4:223, 416; Brent Tarter,*The Grandees of Government: The Origins and Persistence of Undemocratic Politics in Virginia*(Charlottesville, VA: 2013), 3–87; Morgan,*American Slavery, American Freedom,*108–130; David Brion Davis,*Inhuman Bondage: The Rise and Fall of Slavery in the New World*(Oxford: 2006), 124–156, 175–204, 297–322; Stuart Banner,*How the Indians Lost Their Land: Law and Power on the Frontier*(Cambridge, MA: 2005), passim.

Chapter 1: Jamestown

[1.](chapter_01.md#en0010) Samuel M. Bemiss,*The Three Charters of the Virginia Company of London… 1606–1621*(Williamsburg, VA: 1957), 1–12; Karen Ordahl Kupperman,*The Jamestown Project*(Cambridge, MA: 2007), 12–42, 183–217; Lansdowne MS 160, ff. 356–357, British Library, London, UK. The proposal was likely written in January 1608 with the intention of expanding support for Jamestown following what appeared initially to be its successful establishment. My transcription is from the original MS, Virginia Colonial Records Project, John D. Rockefeller Jr. Library, Colonial Williamsburg Foundation, microfilm.

[2.](chapter_01.md#en0011) Two English colonies were created by the charter of April 10, 1606. One, in the mid-Atlantic corresponding to an area that stretched from Cape Fear in North Carolina to New York, was named the first colony of Virginia. The other, which included New England but reached as far south as the Chesapeake Bay, was called the second colony of Virginia. Together they represented the twin centers of English activity of the previous twenty years and were sponsored by London and West Country political and mercantile interests, respectively. Theodore K. Rabb,*Enterprise and Empire: Merchant and Gentry Investment in the Expansion of England, 1575–1630*(Cambridge, MA: 1967); Susan Myra Kingsbury, ed.,*The Records of the Virginia Company of London*(hereafter*RVC*), 4 vols. (Washington, DC: 1906–1935), 3:240, 256;*A Declaration of the State of the Colonie and Affaires in Virginia.…*(London: 1620), 19.

[3.](chapter_01.md#en0012) William S. Powell,*John Pory, 1572–1636: The Life and Letters of a Man of Many Parts*(Chapel Hill, NC: 1977), 6–75; Kingsbury,*RVC,*3:220–221.

[4.](chapter_01.md#en0013) Kingsbury,*RVC,*3:221–222.

[5.](chapter_01.md#en0014) John Rolfe,*A True Relation of the State of Virginia Lefte by Sir Thomas Dale Knight in May Last 1616*(Charlottesville, VA: 1971), 7–10; William Thorndale, “The Virginia Census of 1619,”*Virginia Genealogical Society*33 (1995): 155–170.

[6.](chapter_01.md#en0015) Philip L. Barbour, ed.,*The Jamestown Voyages under the First Charter, 1606–1609,*2 vols. (Cambridge: 1969): 1:49–51.

[7.](chapter_01.md#en0016) Sebastian Munster,*A Treatyse of the Newe India, with Other New Founde Landes and Ilandes.…,*trans. Richard Eden (London: 1553), sig. aa iiiz—aa iiiiv. For examples of Spanish activities, see Charles Hudson,*Knights of Spain, Warriors of the Sun: Hernando de Soto and the South’s Ancient Chiefdoms*(Athens, GA: 1997), 2, 89, 130, 176–178,189, 203; David B. Quinn, ed.,*New American World: A Documentary History of North America to 1612,*5 vols. (New York: 1979), 2:543–544, 546, 548. For French explorations of the Florida coast, see Sarah Lawson,*A Foothold in Florida: The Eye-Witness Account of Four Voyages Made by the French to that Region and the Attempt at Colonization, 1562–1568*(East Grinstead, England: 1992), 5, 94–95, 127. For English activities, see David B. Quinn,*England and the Discovery of America, 1481–1620*(New York: 1974); E. G. R. Taylor, ed.,*The Original Writings and Correspondence of the Two Richard Hakluyts,*2 vols. (London: 1935), 2:254, 283–289, and David B. Quinn, ed.,*The Roanoke Voyages, 1584–1590,*2 vols. (London: 1955), 1:263–264, 268–270, 273–275, 2:761–765.

[8.](chapter_01.md#en0017) Barbour,*Jamestown Voyages,*1:110–113.

[9.](chapter_01.md#en0018) Barbour,*Jamestown Voyages,*1:46–48; Philip L. Barbour, ed.,*The Complete Works of Captain John Smith,*3 vols. (Chapel Hill, NC: 1986), 2:139–140, 3:236.

[10.](chapter_01.md#en0019) Barbour,*Jamestown Voyages*, 1:214–234 (reference to “a Parliament,” 227). The original is in Lambeth Palace Library, MS 250, ff. 382r–395v. Jocelyn R. Wingfield,*Virginia’s True Founder: Edward Maria Wingfield and His Times, 1550–1631*(North Charleston, SC: 2007), and offers a spirited defense of Wingfield’s conduct in Virginia. Ratcliffe’s real name was Sicklemore, which suggests he had adopted an alias because he was sending secret reports back to England to a high-placed patron. He and Smith both served as presidents and were also subsequently overthrown, the latter in an attempt on his life that left him grievously wounded and unable to remain in Virginia.

[11.](chapter_01.md#en0020) Alexander Brown,*The First Republic in America*(Boston: 1898), 73–74, 83; Alexander Brown,*The Genesis of the United States,*2 vols. (New York: 1890), 1:341–342;*A True and Sincere Declaration of the Purposes and Ends of the Plantation Begun in Virginia.…,*in*Jamestown Narratives: Eyewitness Accounts of the Virginia Colony. The First Decade: 1607–1617,*ed. Edward Wright Haile (Champlain, VA: 1988), 356–371; Barbour,*Jamestown Voyages,*2:274–277.

[12.](chapter_01.md#en0021) Bemiss,*Three Charters,*27–28, 42–54. Sir Thomas Smythe was to exert great influence on the affairs of the colony over the next decade and beyond. The council was named formally His Majesty’s Council for the Company of Adventurers for Virginia, sometimes shortened to simply His Majesty’s Council.

[13.](chapter_01.md#en0022) Bemiss,*Three Charters,*55–75; Darrett B. Rutman, “The Virginia Company and Its Military Regime,” in*The Old Dominion: Essays for Thomas Perkins Abernethy,*ed. Darrett B. Rutman (Charlottesville, VA: 1964), 1–20; Kingsbury,*RVC,*3:15; John M. Collins,*Martial Law and English Laws, c. 1500–c. 1700*(Cambridge: 2016), 29–133. Lord De La Warr was thirty-two when he was appointed. He had distinguished himself in the wars in the Netherlands and Ireland, served in Parliament, and was a member of the king’s privy council.

[14.](chapter_01.md#en0023) David H. Flaherty, ed.,*Lawes Divine, Morall and Martiall, etc.*(Charlottesville, VA: 1969). For a discussion of the laws, see David Thomas Konig, “‘Dale’s Laws’ and the Non-Common Law Origins of Criminal Justice in Virginia,”*American Journal of Legal History*26 (1982): 354–375; Edward L. Bond,*Damned Souls in a Tobacco Colony: Religion on Seventeenth-Century Virginia*(Macon, GA: 2000), 83–92; Paul Philip Musselwhite, “Towns in Mind: Urban Plans, Political Culture, and Empire in the Colonial Chesapeake, 1607–1722” (PhD diss., College of William and Mary, 2011), 23–33; and generally Alexander B. Haskell, “‘The Affections of the People’: Ideology and the Politics of State Building in Colonial Virginia, 1607–1754” (PhD diss., Johns Hopkins University, 2004), 1–137.

[15.](chapter_01.md#en0024) Brown,*Genesis,*1:238–240, 248–253; Kent History and Library Center, Maidstone, Kent, England, Sandwich Borough Records, Sa/ZB2/64-68; Bemiss,*Three Charters,*27–54. The Company also urged the City of London and merchant guilds to make voluntary contributions to help “ease the city and suburbs of a swarm of unnecessary inmates [migrants], as a continual cause of dearth and famine, and the very original cause of all the plagues that happen in this kingdom.”

[16.](chapter_01.md#en0025) Bemiss,*Three Charters,*42–43, 60–61, 65–67.

[17.](chapter_01.md#en0026) Quinn,*New American World,*5:238–248; Andrew Fitzmaurice, “The Commercial Ideology of Colonization in Jacobean England: Robert Johnson, Giovanni Botero, and the Pursuit of Greatness,”*William and Mary Quarterly*(hereafter*WMQ*), 3d ser., 64 (2007): 791–820; Alexander B. Haskell,*For God, King, and People: Forging Commonwealth Bonds in Renaissance Virginia*(Chapel Hill, NC: 2017), 138–139, 146–149; Edmond Smith, “A Merchant Colony: Reinterpreting the Virginia Plantation in its Global Context, 1609–1618,”*WMQ,*3d ser. (forthcoming).

[18.](chapter_01.md#en0027) For promoters of American ventures in the 1570s and 1580s who emphasized commercial benefits, see Quinn,*New American World,*3:27–34 (Christopher Carleill), 49–53 (Sir George Peckham), and 61–123 (the two Richard Hakluyts).

[19.](chapter_01.md#en0028) Promotional literature of the 1570s and 1580s had highlighted spreading the gospel as one of the many benefits that would follow the founding of English colonies in America. See John Parker, “Religion and the Virginia Colony, 1609–10,” in*The Westward Enterprise: English Activities in Ireland, the Atlantic and America, 1480–1650,*ed. K. R. Andrews, N. P. Canny, and P. E. H. Hair (Liverpool: 1978), 247–248, 257; Bond,*Damned Souls,*1–29; Brown,*Genesis,*1:290, 313–314, 369, 463; Edward D. Neill,*The English Colonization of America During the Seventeenth Century*(London: 1871), 71; Carla Gardina Pestana,*Protestant Empire: Religion and the Making of the British Atlantic World*(Philadelphia, PA: 2009), 67–69; Douglas Bradburn, “The Eschatological Origins of the English Empire,” in*Early Modern Virginia: Reconsidering the Old Dominion,*ed. Douglas Bradburn and John C. Coombs (Charlottesville, VA: 2011), 17–36.

[20.](chapter_01.md#en0029) Lauren Working, “‘The Savages of Virginia Our Project’: The Powhatan in Jacobean Political Thought,” and Nicholas Canny, “Race, Conflict, and Exclusion in Ulster, Ireland, and Virginia,” in*Virginia 1619: Slavery, Freedom, and the Construction of English America,*ed. Paul Musselwhite, James Horn, and Peter C. Mancall (Chapel Hill, NC: forthcoming); Nicholas Canny,*Making Ireland British, 1580–1650*(Oxford: 2001), 203–204.

[21.](chapter_01.md#en0030) Population estimates are derived from Christian F. Feest, in Bruce G. Trigger, ed.,*Northeast*(Washington, DC: 1978), 241–242, 255–256; E. Randolph Turner, “Socio-Political Organization within the Powhatan Chiefdom and the Effects of European Contact, A.D. 1607–1646,” in*Cultures in Contact: The European Impact on Native Cultural Institutions in Eastern North America, A.D. 1000–1800,*ed. William W. Fitzhugh (Washington, DC: 1985), 193; William Strachey,*The Historie of Travell into Virginia Britania (1612),*ed. Louis B. Wright and Virginia Freud (London: 1953), 57; J. Frederick Fausz, “Patterns of Anglo-Indian Aggression and Accommodation along the Mid-Atlantic Coast, 1584–1634,” in*Cultures in Contact,*ed. Fitzhugh, 226–236; Helen C. Rountree,*The Powhatan Indians of Virginia: Their Traditional Culture*(Lincoln, NE: 1989), 7–15; Frederic W. Gleach,*Powhatan’s World and Colonial Virginia: A Conflict of Cultures*(Lincoln, NE: 1997), 22–28; April Lee Hatfield, “Spanish Colonization Literature, Powhatan Geographies, and English Perceptions of Tsenacommacah/Virginia,”*Journal of Southern History*69 (2003): 245–283; Daniel K. Richter, “Tsenacommacah and the Atlantic World,” in*The Atlantic World and Virginia, 1550–1624,*ed. Peter C. Mancall (Chapel Hill, NC: 2007), 29–65; Martin D. Gallivan,*The Powhatan Landscape: An Archaeological History of the Algonquian Chesapeake*(Gainesville, FL: 2016), passim. The tidewater is the coastal region below the fall line where the rivers are tidal. It extends about a hundred miles from the Virginia coast inland to the piedmont. The*piedmont*is the term used to describe the gently sloping plateau that runs up to the Blue Ridge Mountains, the eastern chain of the Appalachians.

[22.](chapter_01.md#en0031) Barbour,*Complete Works,*1:53, 55; Strachey,*Historie,*37, 56–57, 60–61; Robert Beverley,*The History and Present State of Virginia,*ed. Louis B. Wright (Chapel Hill, NC: 1947), 45, 61; J. Frederick Fausz, “Opechancanough: Indian Resistance Leader,” in*Struggle and Survival in Colonial America,*ed. David G. Sweet and Gary B. Nash (Berkeley, CA: 1981), 23; James D. Rice, “Escape from Tsenacommacah: Chesapeake Algonquians and the Powhatan Menace,” in*The Atlantic World,*ed. Mancall, 97–140; Barbour,*Jamestown Voyages,*1:93; Barbour,*Complete Works,*1:147, 2:97–99. I have made no effort to provide a thorough description of the Powhatan’s society, spiritual beliefs, economy, or culture. For such studies, see in particular works by Helen Rountree, Frederic Gleach, Martin D. Gallivan, James Rice, and, more broadly, Bernard Bailyn,*The Barbarous Years: The Peopling of British North America: The Conflict of Civilizations, 1600–1675*(New York: 2012), 3–31.

[23.](chapter_01.md#en0032) Barbour,*Jamestown Voyages,*1:95, 133–138. Generally, see James Horn, “Imperfect Understandings: Rumor, Knowledge, and Uncertainty in Early Virginia,” in*The Atlantic World,*ed. Mancall, 513–540. The remains of one of the settlers killed in the Indian attack, a young man of approximately fifteen years of age, have been discovered by the archaeologists of Jamestown Rediscovery at the original site.

[24.](chapter_01.md#en0033) Lorri Glover and Daniel Blake Smith,*The Shipwreck that Saved Jamestown: The*Sea Venture*Castaways and the Fate of America*(New York: 2008), 49–123, 171–193.

[25.](chapter_01.md#en0034) Barbour,*Jamestown Voyages,*2:283–284.

[26.](chapter_01.md#en0035) The best account of the war remains John Frederick Fausz’s “The Powhatan Uprising of 1622: A Historical Study of Ethnocentrism and Cultural Conflict” (PhD diss., College of William and Mary, 1977), 267–285, and his “An ‘Abundance of Blood Shed on Both Sides’: England’s First Indian War, 1609–1614,”*Virginia Magazine of History and Biography*(hereafter*VMHB*) 98 (1990): 3–56; Mark Nicholls, “George Percy’s ‘Trewe Relacyon’: A Primary Source for the Jamestown Settlement,”*VMHB*113 (2005): 247–248, 264–265.

[27.](chapter_01.md#en0036) Horn,*Land as God Made It,*157–178; Nicholls, “George Percy’s ‘Trewe Relacyon,’” 243–252, 269; James Horn, William M. Kelso, Douglas Owsley, and Beverley Straube,*Jane: Starvation, Cannibalism, and Endurance at Jamestown*(Richmond, VA: 2013); Brown,*Genesis,*1:363; Haile,*Jamestown Narratives,*702. In addition, approximately fifty to sixty colonists survived at Fort Algernon downriver from Jamestown.

[28.](chapter_01.md#en0037) Nicholls, “George Percy’s ‘Trewe Relacyon,’” 252–254; Matthew Jennings,*New Worlds of Violence: Cultures and Conquests in the Early American Southeast*(Knoxville, TN: 2011), 97–109.

[29.](chapter_01.md#en0038) Fausz, “An ‘Abundance of Blood,’” 30–42; Haile,*Jamestown Narratives,*553–556. The remains of Captain William West, a relation of Lord De La Warr, were discovered in the chancel of the first church (1608) at Jamestown in 2013. He was killed in fighting at the falls in the winter of 1610–1611 and his body returned to James Fort, where he was buried with honor; see Jamestown Rediscovery,*Holy Ground: Archaeology, Religion, and the First Founders of Jamestown*(Richmond, VA: 2016) for a brief account of the discovery and identification of West and three other men buried in the chancel.

[30.](chapter_01.md#en0039) Haile,*Jamestown Narratives,*434–435, 708, 711; Nicholls, “George Percy’s ‘Trewe Relacyon,’” 252; Bond,*Damned Souls,*1–4, 22–23; Brown,*Genesis,*1:361–373.

[31.](chapter_01.md#en0040) Ralph Hamor,*A True Discourse of the Present State of Virginia*(London: 1615), 2–16; Horn,*Land as God Made It,*211–223; Fausz, “An ‘Abundance of Blood,’” 43–49.

[32.](chapter_01.md#en0041) The original site of the church was discovered in 2010 by Jamestown Rediscovery archaeologists. See William M. Kelso,*Jamestown: The Truth Revealed*(Charlottesville, VA: 2017), 167–171; Rolfe,*True Relation,*12–14. Pocahontas/Rebecca called herself Matoaka, which was her Powhatan adult name. Pocahontas was her nickname (diminutive) as a girl.

[33.](chapter_01.md#en0042) Brown,*Genesis,*2:639–640, 774–779;*A Briefe Declaration of the Present State of Things in Virginia*(London: 1616), 5; Haile,*Jamestown Narratives,*757; Strachey,*Historie,*21–22; Hamor,*True Discourse,*24, 34; Barbour,*Complete Works,*2:262.

[34.](chapter_01.md#en0043) Brown,*Genesis,*2:789–790; Lyon Gardiner Tyler, ed.,*Narratives of Early Virginia, 1606–1625*(New York: 1966), 422–424; Bemiss,*Three Charters,*89–92. Newgate was one of London’s most notorious prisons. See Dale to Salisbury, August 17, 1611, Public Record Office, CO1/1, f. 95 (VCRP 622) and Haile,*Jamestown Narratives,*748, 765–766. The term*hundred*was derived from an ancient English (late Saxon) administrative unit below the level of the county associated with the militia, maintenance of justice, and tax collection.

[35.](chapter_01.md#en0044) Irene A. Hecht, “The Virginia Colony, 1607–1640: A Study in Frontier Growth” (PhD diss., University of Washington, 1969), 68–74; Brown,*Genesis*, 2:783; Rolfe,*True Relation,*3, 6–11. The settlements were: (1) Henrico, on the north side of the James River, where 38 men and boys lived, most of whom were farmers together with a few laborers, all of whom farmed for themselves. (2) Bermuda Nether Hundred, on the south bank, five miles as the crow flies downriver from Henrico, where 119 men and women lived, most of the whom were laborers contracted to work for three years producing pitch, tar, potashes, and charcoal. (3) At West and Sherley Hundred, located a few miles below Bermuda Hundred, were 25 men employed in cultivating tobacco, while (4) on Jamestown Island were 50 settlers, of which two-thirds were farmers tending their crops and looking after the Company’s livestock. (5) Near the entrance to the James River, the settlement at Kecoughtan had 20 men, half of whom were farmers. Finally, across the Chesapeake Bay (6) near Cape Charles on the Eastern Shore was Dale’s Gift, where 17 men fished and produced salt. See Dale’s concerns in his letter of June 18, 1614, in Hamor,*True Discourse,*57–59, cited by Smith, “A Merchant Colony.”

Chapter 2: The Great Reforms

[1.](chapter_02.md#en0045) Philip J. Stern, “Companies: Monopoly, Sovereignty, and the East Indies,” in*Mercantilism Reimagined: Political Economy in Early Modern Britain and its Empire,*ed. Philip J. Stern and Carl Wennerlind (Oxford: 2014), 179.

[2.](chapter_02.md#en0046) Philip L. Barbour, ed.,*The Jamestown Voyages under the First Charter, 1606–1609,*2 vols. (Cambridge: 1969), 1:24; John T. Juricek, “English Territorial Claims in North America under Elizabeth and the Early Stuarts,”*Terrae Firma*7 (1976): 7–22. Stuart Banner considers the complexity of the issue and contrasting opinions in*How the Indians Lost Their Land: Law and Power on the Frontier*(Cambridge, MA: 2005), 10–48.

[3.](chapter_02.md#en0047) Ralph Hamor,*A True Discourse of the Present State of Virginia*(London: 1615), 17; I owe this point to Paul Musselwhite, “Private Plantation: The Political Economy of Land in Early Virginia,” in*Virginia 1619: Slavery, Freedom, and the Construction of English America,*ed. Paul Musselwhite, James Horn, and Peter C. Mancall (Chapel Hill, NC: forthcoming); Wesley Frank Craven,*Dissolution of the Virginia Company: The Failure of a Colonial Experiment*(Gloucester, MA: 1964), 35; William Bradford,*Of Plymouth Plantation, 1620–1647,*ed. Francis Murphy (New York: 1981), 133–134.

[4.](chapter_02.md#en0048) Hamor,*True Discourse,*31–32; John Rolfe,*A True Relation of the State of Virginia Lefte by Sir Thomas Dale Knight in May Last 1616*(Charlottesville, VA: 1971), 9–10.

[5.](chapter_02.md#en0049)*A Briefe Declaration of the Present State of Things in Virginia, and of a Division to Be Now Made, of Some Part of Those Lands in Our Actuall Possession.*… (London: 1616), 5–6; Alexander Brown,*The Genesis of the United States,*2 vols. (New York: 1890), 2:776–779; Wesley Frank Craven,*The Southern Colonies in the Seventeenth Century, 1607–1689*(Baton Rouge, LA: 1970), 116–120.

[6.](chapter_02.md#en0050) An early map of the James River shows the location of Argall’s Town; see Michael Jarvis and Jeroen van Driel, “The Vingboons Chart of the James River, Virginia, circa 1617,”*William and Mary Quarterly,*3d ser., 54 (1997): 386; Charles E. Hatch,*The First Seventeen Years: Virginia, 1607–1624*(Charlottesville, VA: 1957), 18, 35–39, 104–105; Susan Myra Kingsbury, ed.,*The Records of the Virginia Company of London*(hereafter*RVC*), 4 vols. (Washington, DC: 1906–1935), 3:68, 103; Lorena S. Walsh,*Motives of Honor, Pleasure, and Profit: Plantation Management in the Colonial Chesapeake, 1607–1763*(Chapel Hill, NC: 2010), 38–46.

[7.](chapter_02.md#en0051) David Thomas Konig, “Colonization and the Common Law in Ireland and Virginia, 1569–1634,” in*The Transformation of Early American History: Society, Authority, and Ideology,*ed. James A. Henretta, Michael Kammen, and Stanley N. Katz (New York: 1991), 83–85; Musselwhite, “Reshaping Plantation”; Kingsbury,*RVC,*1:303.

[8.](chapter_02.md#en0052) C. M. MacInnes,*The Early English Tobacco Trade*(London: 1926), 27–36, 47–48; Jeffrey Knapp, “Elizabethan Tobacco,” in*New World Encounters,*ed. Stephen Greenblatt (Berkeley, CA: 1993), 272–312; Craven,*Southern Colonies,*123–124; Bernard Bailyn,*The Barbarous Years: The Peopling of British North America: The Conflict of Civilizations, 1600–1675*(New York: 2012), 79; Walsh,*Motives of Honor,*38; Hamor,*True Discourse,*24; Philip L. Barbour, ed.,*The Complete Works of Captain John Smith,*3 vols. (Chapel Hill, NC: 1986), 2:262–263; Irene A. Hecht, “The Virginia Colony, 1607–1640: A Study in Frontier Growth” (PhD diss., University of Washington, 1969), 79–80. For Bermuda’s early predominance, see Michael J. Jarvis,*In the Eye of All Trade: Bermuda, Bermudians, and the Maritime Atlantic World, 1680–1783*(Chapel Hill, NC: 2010), 26–29. Virginia’s production did not overtake Bermuda’s until the mid-1620s.

[9.](chapter_02.md#en0053) Ken MacMillan,*Sovereignty and Possession in the English New World: The Legal Foundations of Empire, 1576–1640*(Cambridge: 2006), 29–41; Paul D. Halliday,*Habeus Corpus: From England to Empire*(Cambridge, MA: 2010), 156; Daniel J. Hulsebosch, “The Ancient Constitution and the Expanding Empire: Sir Edward Coke’s British Jurisprudence,”*Law and History Review*21 (2003): 439–482; Mary Dewar, ed.,*De Republica Anglorum by Sir Thomas Smith*(Cambridge: 1982), 88; Robert Zaller,*The Discourse of Legitimacy in Early Modern England*(Stanford, CA: 2007), 1–50, 223–354; Ellis Sandoz, ed.,*The Roots of Liberty: Magna Carta, Ancient Constitution, and the Anglo-American Tradition of the Rule of Law*(Columbia, MO: 1993), passim; Charles M. Gray, “Parliament, Liberty, and the Law,” in*Parliament and Liberty: From the Reign of Elizabeth to the English Civil War,*ed. J. H. Hexter (Stanford, CA: 1992), 155–200, 304–309.

[10.](chapter_02.md#en0054) Johann P. Sommerville, ed.,*King James VI and I: Political Writings*(Cambridge: 1994), 64–65; Samuel M. Bemiss,*The Three Charters of the Virginia Company of London… 1606–1621*(Williamsburg, VA: 1957), 1, 51, 86–87; Philip L. Barbour, ed.,*The Jamestown Voyages under the First Charter, 1606–1609,*2 vols. (Cambridge: 1969), 1:35. In the charter of 1612, laws and ordinances passed for the welfare of the plantation were simply stated not to be “contrary to the laws and statutes of this our realm of England”; MacMillan,*Sovereignty and Possession,*89–96.

[11.](chapter_02.md#en0055) Bemiss,*Three Charters,*47; David Thomas Konig, “‘Dale’s Laws’ and the Non-Common Law Origins of Criminal Justice in Virginia,”*American Journal of Legal History*26 (1982): 354–375, and Konig, “Colonization and the Common Law,” 70–92, 276–280; Halliday,*Habeus Corpus,*137–157; Nicholas Canny,*Making Ireland British, 1580–1650*(Oxford: 2001), 59–164; Bailyn,*The Barbarous Years,*39–40.

[12.](chapter_02.md#en0056) Kingsbury,*RVC,*2:51–56. A scathing attack on Smythe and Argall was written by Nicholas Ferrar in 1624,*Sir Thomas Smith’s Misgovernment of the Virginia Company,*ed. D. R. Ransome (Cambridge: 1990), 3–15; Craven,*Dissolution,*45. For the corruption of public officials and abuse of martial law in Ireland in 1590, see Canny,*Making Ireland British,*91. Lord De La Warr, who was still the lord governor and captain general of Virginia, was to replace the deputy governor, Captain Samuel Argall, in the summer of 1618 but died at sea en route to the colony. Yeardley departed for Jamestown in January 1619. Alexander Brown,*The First Republic of America: An Account of the Origins of the Nation.*… (New York: 1898), 281–283; National Archives UK, C24, 486.

[13.](chapter_02.md#en0057) Ferrar Papers (hereafter FP) 93, December 5, 1618,*Virginia Company Archives*(hereafter*VCA*), Adam Mathew Digital (2007); Theodore K. Rabb,*Jacobean Gentleman: Sir Edwin Sandys, 1561–1629*(Princeton, NJ: 1998), 3–54; Andrew Thrush and John P. Ferris, eds.,*The House of Commons, 1604–1629,*6 vols. (Cambridge: 2010), 6:502–508; Sir John Fortescue’s*De Laudibus Legnum Angliae*was translated into English nearly a century later by Richard Mulcaster, Sandys’s headmaster at Merchant Taylors’ School. Thrush and Ferris,*The House of Commons,*6: see entry for Sir Edwin Sandys; Andrew Fitzmaurice, “Introduction: Neither Neo-Roman nor Liberal Empire,”*Renaissance Studies*26 (2012): 479–482; Richard Tuck,*Philosophy and Government, 1572–1651*(Cambridge: 1993), 146–151. Hooker’s staunchly Anglican work defended the Elizabethan Church settlement against Puritan critics who continued to seek far-reaching reforms to bring English religious practice into closer conformity with that of Reformed Protestantism elsewhere in Europe, notably Presbyterianism. Careful to avoid a direct challenge, Hooker underlined the continuing importance of liturgy and communal prayer and put much more emphasis than Puritans on the value of preaching and sermons.

[14.](chapter_02.md#en0058) Pauline Croft,*King James*(New York: 2003), 48–86; Margaret Atwood Judson,*The Crisis of the Constitution: An Essay in Constitutional and Political Thought in England, 1603–1645*(New York: 1964), 17–106; J. H. Hexter, ed.,*Parliament and Liberty: From the Reign of Elizabeth to the English Civil War*(Stanford, CA: 1992), passim; Burgess,*The Politics of the Ancient Constitution,*151–156; Sommerville,*King James VI and I: Political Writings;*Conrad Russell,*King James VI & I and His English Parliaments,*ed. Richard Cust and Andrew Thrush (Oxford: 2012), passim. See also Glenn Burgess,*Absolute Monarchy and the Stuart Constitution*(New Haven, CT: 1996); James S. Hart,*The Rule of Law, 1603–1660*(Edinburgh: 2003), 79–81; David Harris Sacks, “Parliament, Liberty, and the Commonweal,” in*Parliament and Liberty,*ed. Hexter, 85–121; Rabb,*Jacobean Gentleman,*92–173; Robert Zaller,*The Discourse of Legitimacy in Early Modern England*(Stanford, CA: 2007), 318–328, 480–487, 502–506, 586–609.

[15.](chapter_02.md#en0059) Rabb,*Jacobean Gentleman,*319–325; Wesley Frank Craven,*Dissolution of the Virginia Company: The Failure of a Colonial Experiment*(Gloucester, MA: 1964), 88. Important recent exceptions include the work of Andrew Fitzmaurice, Paul Musselwhite, and Lauren Working. See also Alexander Haskell, “Like ‘the Roote and Body of a Tree’: The Renaissance Ideal of the Public and the Creation of Virginia’s General Assembly,” in*Virginia 1619,*ed. Musselwhite, Horn, and Mancall, and his*For God, King, and People: Forging Commonwealth Bonds in Renaissance Virginia*(Chapel Hill, NC: 2017), 137–198.

[16.](chapter_02.md#en0060) Brown,*Genesis,*2:890–891, 1061–1063; Thrush and Ferris,*House of Commons,*3:463–465, 4:17–18, 245–247; G. P. V. Akrigg,*Shakespeare and the Earl of Southampton*(Cambridge, MA: 1968); Stephen Greenblatt,*Will in the World: How Shakespeare Became Shakespeare*(New York: 2004), 227–232.

[17.](chapter_02.md#en0061) Kingsbury,*RVC,*3:98–109, 482–484; FP 93, December 5, 1618,*VCA,*Adam Mathew Digital (2007); Jon Kukla,*Political Institutions in Virginia, 1618–1660*(New York: 1989), 40–48.

[18.](chapter_02.md#en0062) William S. Powell,*John Pory, 1572–1636: The Life and Letters of a Man of Many Parts*(Chapel Hill, NC: 1977), 25–30; Kingsbury,*RVC,*1:350–351, 2:404, 3:98–109, 158, 473, 478, 482–484; Craven,*Dissolution,*41–54, 73–75; Warren M. Billings,*A Little Parliament: The Virginia General Assembly in the Seventeenth Century*(Richmond, VA: 2004), 5–7; Brown,*First Republic,*456; Konig, “Colonization and the Common Law,” 86; Craven,*Southern Colonies,*129–131; see in particular Musselwhite, “Towns in Mind,” 34–51; H. R. McIlwaine, ed.,*Journals of the House of Burgesses of Virginia, 1619–1658/59*(Richmond, VA: 1915), 36.

[19.](chapter_02.md#en0063) FP 93, December 5, 1618,*VCA.*

[20.](chapter_02.md#en0064) Kingsbury,*RVC,*3:473, 478, 482–484; Billings,*A Little Parliament,*149–171; Paul D. Halliday, “Brase’s Case: Making Slave Law as Customary Law in Virginia’s General Court, 1619–1625,” in*Virginia 1619,*ed. Musselwhite, Horn, and Mancall; Jon Kukla,*Political Institutions in Virginia, 1618–1660*(New York: 1989), 43–45; Brown,*First Republic,*456.

[21.](chapter_02.md#en0065) FP 93, December 5, 1618,*VCA;*Kukla,*Political Institutions,*48–50; Billings,*A Little Parliament,*7–10; Craven,*Dissolution,*67–73; Haskell,*For God, King, and People,*196–198; MacMillan,*Sovereignty and Possession,*32–33.

[22.](chapter_02.md#en0066) Despite its importance, few comprehensive accounts of the first General Assembly exist, but see McIlwaine,*Journals,*36; Kingsbury,*RVC,*4:449; Billings,*A Little Parliament,*7–10. An excellent transcription with a facsimile of the document is provided in William J. Van Schreeven and George H. Reese, eds.,*Proceedings of the General Assembly of Virginia, July 30–August 4, 1619*(Jamestown, VA: 1969).

[23.](chapter_02.md#en0067) Kingsbury,*RVC,*3:119, 154–155; National Archives UK, C24, 486. In Anglican churches, the*choir*is traditionally the western part of the chancel. The church was built on the instructions of Samuel Argall, and excavations of the 1617 church by Jamestown Rediscovery archaeologists have revealed it was approximately fifty feet long and twenty wide with cobblestone and brick foundations, timber frame and plaster walls, and a wooden or thatch roof. The interior would also have been plastered. Appropriately, carpenters transported by Lord De La Warr were put “to work about the church,” where he was buried in mid-August 1618, National Archives, UK, C24/486. Peter Wilson Coldham, “The Voyage of the*Neptune*to Virginia, 1618–1619, and the Disposition of its Cargo,”*Virginia Magazine of History and Biography*(*VMHB*) 87 (1979): 33, 40, 43; Jon Kukla,*Political Institutions in Virginia, 1618–1660*(New York: 1989): 51–52.

[24.](chapter_02.md#en0068) Kingsbury,*RVC,*3:155–156.

[25.](chapter_02.md#en0069) Kingsbury,*RVC,*3:156–158, 162–164; Van Schreeven and Reese,*Proceedings,*21; Kukla,*Political Institutions,*53–55; Konig, “Colonization and the Common Law,” 84–85.

[26.](chapter_02.md#en0070) Helen C. Rountree,*The Powhatan Indians of Virginia: Their Traditional Culture*(Norman, OK: 1989), 114–116; William Strachey,*The Historie of Travell into Virginia Britania (1612),*eds. Louis B. Wright and Virginia Freud (London: 1953), 77.

[27.](chapter_02.md#en0071) Kingsbury,*RVC,*3:158–159; Powell,*Pory,*87–90; James Rice, “‘These Doubtful Times, Between Us and the Indians’: Indigenous Politics and the Jamestown Colony in 1619,” in*Virginia 1619,*ed. Musselwhite, Horn, and Mancall.

[28.](chapter_02.md#en0072) Kingsbury,*RVC,*3:160–175; Powell,*Pory,*90–93. The examination of Robert Poole is preserved in the Ferrar Papers and provides evidence of the careful preparation of cases that came before the General Assembly acting as a court. See FP 113, July 13, 1619,*VCA;*J. Frederick Fausz, “Middlemen in Peace and War: Virginia’s Earliest Indian Interpreters, 1608–1632,”*Virginia Magazine of History and Biography*5 (1987): 41–64.

[29.](chapter_02.md#en0073) Craven,*Dissolution,*43–50; Brown,*First Republic,*305–307; Elizabeth McClure Thomson, ed.,*The Chamberlain Letters: A Selection of Letters of John Chamberlain concerning Life in England from 1597 to 1626*(New York: 1965), 218–219; Kingsbury,*RVC,*3:118–120, 123, 125–126.

[30.](chapter_02.md#en0074) Kenneth R. Andrews,*Trade, Plunder, and Settlement: Maritime Enterprise and the Genesis of the British Empire, 1480–1630*(Cambridge: 1984), 280–340; Mark G. Hanna,*Pirate Nests and the Rise of the British Empire, 1570–1740*(Chapel Hill, NC: 2015), 63–77.

[31.](chapter_02.md#en0075) Kingsbury,*RVC,*3:176–177. Yeardley dissolved the assembly shortly afterward. The next meeting did not take place until November–December 1621, McIlwaine,*Journals,*17. A revealing description of the first General Assembly held in Bermuda in August 1620 can be found in C. F. E. Hollis Hallett, ed.,*Butler’s History of the Bermudas: A Contemporary Account of Bermuda’s Earliest Government*(Bermuda: 2007), 153–163.

[32.](chapter_02.md#en0076)*A Declaration of the State of the Colony and Affaires in Virginia.*…, June 22, 1620, in Kingsbury,*RVC,*3:309–311; Konig, “Dale’s Laws,” 365, 368–375. Even if settlers were unable to avail themselves of the common law, the adoption by the Company of those “Laws of*England*” suitable for use in the colony was a means of importing traditional laws that had shaped collective and individual English rights for centuries.

[33.](chapter_02.md#en0077) Kingsbury,*RVC,*3:170, 177; Halliday, “Brase’s Case”; Billings,*A Little Parliament,*5–23, and more generally Warren M. Billings, “The Transfer of English Law to Virginia, 1606–1650,” in*The Westward Enterprise: English Activities in Ireland, the Atlantic, and America, 1480–1650,*ed. K. R. Andrews, N. P. Canny, and P. E. H. Hair (Liverpool: 1978), 215–244.

Chapter 3: First Africans

[1.](chapter_03.md#en0078) Philip D. Morgan, “Virginia Slavery in Atlantic Context, 1550 to 1650,” in*Virginia 1619: Slavery, Freedom, and the Construction of English America,*ed. Paul Musselwhite, James Horn, and Peter C. Mancall (Chapel Hill, NC: forthcoming); David Wheat,*Atlantic Africa and the Spanish Caribbean, 1570–1640*(Chapel Hill, NC: 2016), 12.

[2.](chapter_03.md#en0079) Alex Borucki, David Eltis, and David Wheat, “Atlantic History and the Slave Trade to Spanish America,”*American Historical Review*(hereafter*AHR*) 120 (2015): 440. Approximately 275,000 men and women were forcibly taken from Africa and transported to Spanish and Portuguese America in the sixteenth century,*The Trans-Atlantic Slave Trade Data Base.*Nick Hazlewood,*The Queen’s Slave Trader: John Hawkyns, Elizabeth I, and the Trafficking in Human Souls*(New York: 2002), 309–314; Mark G. Hanna,*Pirate Nests and the Rise of the British Empire, 1570–1740*(Chapel Hill, NC: 2015), 70–77; April Lee Hatfield,*Atlantic Virginia: Intercolonial Relations in the Seventeenth Century*(Philadelphia: 2004), 137–138; Engel Sluiter, “New Light on the ‘20. and Odd Negroes’ Arriving in Virginia, August 1619,”*William and Mary Quarterly*(hereafter*WMQ*), 3rd ser., 54 (1997): 395–398.

[3.](chapter_03.md#en0080) Sluiter, “New Light,” 395–398. Accounting for 24 African boys sold in Jamaica and the 60 African captives taken by Jope and Elfrith, the death toll was at least 120, a third of the total who boarded ship in Luanda. Wheat,*Atlantic Africa,*78–81; Susan Myra Kingsbury, ed.,*The Records of the Virginia Company of London*(hereafter*RVC*), 4 vols. (Washington, DC: 1906–1935), 3:219, 243. John Pory reported a few months earlier that “the occasion of this ship’s [*White Lion*] coming hither was an accidental consortship in the West Indies with the*Treasurer,*an English man of war also, licensed by a commission from the Duke of Savoy to take Spaniards as lawful prize.” Piersey was an influential and wealthy settler who first arrived in the colony three years earlier and was in charge of the colony’s magazine (store) exchanging goods sent by the Company for settlers’ tobacco, Martha W. McCartney,*Virginia Immigrants and Adventurers, 1607–1635: A Biographical Dictionary*(Baltimore: 2007), 548–549. Whether the Africans went ashore at Point Comfort and how and by whom they were transported upriver are unknown.

[4.](chapter_03.md#en0081) Kingsbury,*RVC,*1:367, 3:243. Sir Edwin Sandys characterized Bermuda in May 1620 as “much frequented with men of War and Pirates” and “if there be not a strict course taken herein it will be made another Algiers.” Algiers was a major base of operations for the Barbary pirates who preyed on European shipping and sold enslaved Christians to the Turks. Heywood and Thornton estimate that approximately one hundred Africans were in Bermuda by 1620, “a sizable part of the population of the island,” Linda M. Heywood and John K. Thornton,*Angolans, Atlantic Creoles, and the Foundation of the Americas, 1585–1660*(Cambridge: 2007), 5–7, 28; Wesley Frank Craven,*An Introduction to the History of Bermuda,*2nd ed. (Bermuda: 1990), 91–93; Michael J. Jarvis,*In the Eye of All Trade: Bermuda, Bermudians, and the Maritime Atlantic World, 1680–1783*(Chapel Hill, NC: 2010), 29; Michael Guasco,*Slaves and Englishmen: Human Bondage in the Early Modern Atlantic World*(Philadelphia: 2014), 119, 199–201. Tim Hashaw argues that Rolfe deliberately sought to mislead Sandys owing to his loyalty to Captain Samuel Argall, who had authorized the*Treasurer*to raid the West Indies,*The Birth of Black America: The First African Americans and the Pursuit of Freedom at Jamestown*(New York: 2007), 86–91; E. M. Rose, “The Conflicted Politics of Slavery: The First Africans in British North America,” in*Virginia 1619,*ed. Musselwhite, Horn, and Mancall.

[5.](chapter_03.md#en0082)*Virginia Colonial Records Project*(hereafter*VCRP*), Survey Report (hereafter SR) 1106, number 261, from the Manchester Papers; C. F. E. Hollis Hallett, ed.*History of the Bermudas: A Contemporary Account of Bermuda’s Earliest Government*(Bermuda: 2007), 120, 127–128; Heywood and Thornton,*Angolans, Atlantic Creoles,*7–8; William Thorndale, “The Virginia Census of 1619,”*Virginia Genealogical Society*33 (1995): 168. The census was taken in early March 1620.

[6.](chapter_03.md#en0083) Sluiter, “New Light,” 395–398; John Thornton, “The African Experience of the ‘20. and Odd Negroes’ Arriving in Virginia in 1619,”*WMQ,*3rd ser., 55 (1998): 421–434. For the view that the first Africans came from the Spanish Caribbean, see, for example, Wesley Frank Craven,*Red, White, and Black: The Seventeenth Century Virginian*(Charlottesville, VA: 1971), 80–82. Craven notes, however, that there is little evidence for the assumption and refers also to Captain Arthur Guy’s seizure of “an Angola man [ship] with many Negroes” brought to Virginia in 1628.

[7.](chapter_03.md#en0084) Heywood and Thornton,*Angolans, Atlantic Creoles,*52–53, 215–217; Joseph C. Miller,*Way of Death: Merchant Capitalism and the Angolan Slave Trade, 1730–1830*(Madison, WI: 1988), 10–11, 24, 28–29, 36–37, 148; John Thornton,*Africa and Africans in the Making of the Atlantic World, 1400–1800*(Cambridge: 1998), xxvi–xxxvi, 91, 93–94, 96–97, 118; John K. Thornton,*A Cultural History of the Atlantic World, 1250–1820*(Cambridge: 2012), 77.

[8.](chapter_03.md#en0085) Ira Berlin, “From Creoles to African: Atlantic Creoles and the Origins of African-American Society in Mainland North America,”*WMQ,*3rd ser., 53 (1996): 251–288; Ira Berlin,*Many Thousands Gone: The First Two Centuries of Slavery in North America*(Cambridge, MA: 1998), 29–46; Linda M. Heywood and John K. Thornton, “Central African Leadership and the Appropriation of European Culture,” in*The Atlantic World and Virginia, 1550–1624,*ed. Peter C. Mancall (Chapel Hill, NC: 2007),194–224; Heywood and Thornton,*Angolans, Atlantic Creoles*, passim; John C. Coombs is cautious about the “Atlantic Creoles” theory, see “Beyond the ‘Origins Debate’: Rethinking the Rise of Virginia Slavery,” in*Early Modern Virginia: Reconsidering the Old Dominion,*ed. Douglas Bradburn and John C. Coombs (Charlottesville, VA: 2011), 255–263. See also James H. Sweet,*Recreating Africa: Culture, Kinship, and Religion in the African-Portuguese World, 1441–1770*(Chapel Hill, NC: 2003), 115–117, and James H. Sweet, “African Identity and Slave Resistance in the Portuguese Atlantic,” in*The Atlantic World and Virginia,*ed. Mancall, 246–247.

[9.](chapter_03.md#en0086) Linda Heywood, “The Angolan Background to the ‘20 and Odd Negars,” in*Virginia 1619,*ed. Musselwhite, Horn, and Mancall; A. J. R. Russell-Wood, “The Portuguese Atlantic, 1415–1808,” in*Atlantic History: A Critical Appraisal,*ed. Jack P. Greene and Philip D. Morgan (Oxford: 2009), 90–91; Thornton,*A Cultural History of the Atlantic World,*81–82; David Eltis and David Richardson,*Atlas of the Transatlantic Slave Trade*(New Haven, CT: 2010), 136–137, maps 92 and 95.

[10.](chapter_03.md#en0087) Thornton, “The African Experience,” 421–434. Thornton readily concedes that the “20. and odd” could have come from elsewhere in the region where conflict took place in this period. Heywood and Thornton,*Angolans, Atlantic Creoles,*82–123, 227; Heywood, “The Angolan Background”; Linda Heywood,*Njinga of Angola: Africa’s Warrior Queen*(Cambridge, MA: 2017), 1–61; Wheat,*Atlantic Africa,*95–101.

[11.](chapter_03.md#en0088) Thornton, “The African Experience,” 426, 431, 434; Sweet,*Recreating Africa,*162; Thornton,*Africa and Africans,*154–156. The Jagas led by Imbe Kalandula embraced Central African concepts of witchcraft and were viewed as witches by the people they terrorized, Heywood and Thornton,*Angolans, Atlantic Creoles,*93; Robert J. Allison, ed.,*The Interesting Narrative of the Life of Olaudah Equiano, Written by Himself*(New York: 1995), 56; Sluiter, “New Light,” 397; Eltis and Richardson offer estimates of mortality rates for the second half of the seventeenth century, but they may have been higher in earlier decades,*Atlas of the Transatlantic Slave Trade,*167, 169, maps 116, 117; Herbert S. Klein, Stanley L. Engerman, Robin Haines, and Ralph Shlomowitz, “Transoceanic Mortality: The Slave Trade in Comparative Perspective,”*WMQ,*3rd ser., 58 (2001): table VI (a), 114; James Walvin,*Crossings: Africa, the Americas, and the Atlantic Slave Trade*(London: 2013), passim; Morgan, “Virginia Slavery.”

[12.](chapter_03.md#en0089) Martha W. McCartney, “A Study of Africans and African Americans on Jamestown Island and at Green Spring, 1619–1803” (a report for the National Park Service and Colonial Williamsburg: 2003), 36; John Camden Hotten, ed.,*The Original Lists of Persons of Quality; Emigrants; Religious Exiles; Political Rebels; Serving Men Sold for a Term of Years*(Baltimore: 2007), 172–174, 178, 182, 185, 217–218, 222, 224, 229, 241, 244, 257.

[13.](chapter_03.md#en0090)*VCRP,*SR 1106, number 289 from the Manchester Papers; James Horn,*A Land as God Made It: Jamestown and the Birth of America*(New York: 2005), 255, 260–261, 268. Hashaw points out that no Africans were killed in the attack despite heavy losses among planters and their white servants, especially at Bennett’s plantation,*Birth of Black America,*159, but this is not certain. Coombs, “Beyond the ‘Origins Debate,’” 247–250.

[14.](chapter_03.md#en0091) Richard Ligon,*A True and Exact History of the Island of Barbados.*… (London: 1970), 44; Heywood and Thornton,*Angolans, Atlantic Creoles,*169–236, 242–243; Thornton,*A Cultural History,*328–330; Sweet,*Recreating Africa,*13–14,104–115. Some recent historians consider the cultural encounters in Kongo as a striking example of an “Atlantic Creole” culture: the fusion of European and African cultures. Such creole cultures, historians have emphasized, borrowed as much from regional African societies as they drew from the Portuguese.

[15.](chapter_03.md#en0092) The literature on this subject is vast, but for summaries of the debate, see Winthrop D. Jordan,*White Over Black: American Attitudes Toward the Negro, 1550–1812*(Chapel Hill, NC: 1968), 3–98; Alden T. Vaughan,*Roots of American Racism: Essays on the Colonial Experience*(Oxford: 1995), 136–174; Coombs, “Beyond the ‘Origins Debate,’” 239–278. Depending on their age and circumstances, indentured or poor white laborers without contracts usually served from four to seven years, after which they were freed and sometimes given certain “freedom dues” consisting typically of provisions, clothing, basic tools, and even the right to a small area of land, see James Horn and Philip D. Morgan, “Settlers and Slaves: European and African Migrations to Early Modern British America,” in*The Creation of a British Atlantic World,*ed. Elizabeth Manke and Carole Shammas (Baltimore: 2005), 27–28.

[16.](chapter_03.md#en0093) Coombs, “Beyond the ‘Origins Debate,’” 239–278; T. H. Breen and Stephen Innes,*“Myne Owne Ground”: Race and Freedom on Virginia’s Eastern Shore, 1640–1676*(Oxford: 1980), 19–35; Vaughan,*Roots of American Racism,*136–174; Thomas D. Morris,*Southern Slavery and the Law, 1619–1860*(Chapel Hill, NC: 1996), 8–19; [John Ferrar],*A Perfect Description of Virginia.*… (London: 1649), 3.

[17.](chapter_03.md#en0094) Hashaw argues that the three Africans, Antonio, Mary, and John Pedro, who arrived in Virginia after 1620 were originally taken from the*São Joã Bautista,*landed on Bermuda, then transported to Sir Robert Rich in England in 1621 before being returned to Virginia,*Birth of Black America,*130–131, 140–151, 212–217, 299–300. The evidence, however, is circumstantial. Clayton Coleman Hall, ed.,*Narratives of Maryland, 1633–1684*(New York: 1967), 305. For Anthony Johnson, see Breen and Innes,*“Myne Owne Ground,”*7–18, 68–109.

[18.](chapter_03.md#en0095) James H. Sweet, “The Iberian Roots of American Racist Thought,”*WMQ,*3rd ser., 54 (1997): 157–158. The old slave market house in Lagos, Portugal, still exists.

[19.](chapter_03.md#en0096) Gustav Ungerer,*The Mediterranean Apprenticeship of British Slavery*(Madrid: 2008), 70–95; Miranda Kaufmann,*Black Tudors: The Untold Story*(London: 2017); David Olusoga,*Black and British: A Forgotten History*(London: 2017), 44–66; Onyeka,*Blackamoores: Africans in Tudor England, Their Presence, Status and Origins*(London: 2013), xii–xv, 1–40, 52, 211–238; Guasco,*Slaves and Englishmen,*11–79; Richard Hakluyt,*The Principal Navigations, Voyages, Traffiques, and Discoveries of the English Nation,*8 vols. (Glasgow: 1904), 6:167–170, 176; William S. Powell,*John Pory, 1572–1636: The Life and Letters of a Man of Many Parts*(Chapel Hill, NC: 1977), 12–17; Jordan,*White Over Black,*33–34; David Brion Davis, “‘Constructing Race’: A Reflection,”*WMQ,*3rd ser., 54 (1997): 7–18.

[20.](chapter_03.md#en0097) Borucki, Eltis, and Wheat, “Atlantic History,” 433–461; Hatfield,*Atlantic Virginia,*138; Hazlewood,*The Queen’s Slave Trader,*309–314.

[21.](chapter_03.md#en0098) Morgan, “Virginia Slavery”; Jonathan A. Bush, “The British Constitution and the Creation of American Slavery,” in*Slavery and the Law,*ed. Paul Finkelman (New York: 1997), 379–418; Guasco,*Slaves and Englishmen,*208; Lorena S. Walsh,*Motives of Honor, Pleasure, and Profit: Plantation Management in the Colonial Chesapeake, 1607–1763*(Chapel Hill, NC: 2010), 116.

[22.](chapter_03.md#en0099) Kingsbury,*RVC,*3:243; H. R. McIlwaine, ed.,*Minutes of the Council and General Court of Colonial America,*2nd ed. (Richmond, VA: 1979), 66–69, 71–73; and Paul D. Halliday’s insightful, “Brase’s Case: Making Slave Law as Customary Law in Virginia’s General Court, 1619–1625,” in*Virginia 1619,*ed. Musselwhite, Horn, and Mancall; Edmund S. Morgan,*American Slavery, American Freedom: The Ordeal of Colonial Virginia*(New York: 1975), 119.

[23.](chapter_03.md#en0100) McCartney, “A Study of Africans and African Americans,” 37; Hashaw,*Birth of Black America,*106–109; McCartney,*Virginia Immigrants and Adventurers,*484–485;*VCRP,*SR 6153, ff. 560v–561r; National Archives, UK, Principal Probate Registry Class, Will Register Books, 9 Ridley, 1v, r; Virginia Historical Society, Richmond, Virginia, MSS 2y327a.

[24.](chapter_03.md#en0101) Coombs, “Beyond the ‘Origins Debate,’” 247, 254–258.

[25.](chapter_03.md#en0102)*VCRP,*SR 1106, number 289; John C. Coombs, “Building the Machine: The Development of Slavery in Early Colonial Virginia” (PhD diss., College of William and Mary, 2003), 38, 41–42; James Horn,*Adapting to a New World: English Society in the Seventeenth-Century Chesapeake*(Chapel Hill, NC: 1994), 172. Two ships brought approximately 165 enslaved Africans (some from the Bight of Biafra on the west coast of Africa) in the 1650s. Guasco,*Slaves and Englishmen,*199–209; Virginia Bernhard, “Beyond the Chesapeake: The Contrasting Status of Blacks in Bermuda, 1616–1663,”*Journal of Southern History*54 (1988): 545–564; Karen Ordahl Kupperman,*Providence Island: The Other Puritan Colony, 1630–1641*(Cambridge: 1993), 172. Providence Island lies off the coast of Nicaragua. The first law in English America that was explicitly racially motivated was passed by the assembly of Bermuda in 1623: “An act to restrain the insolences of the Negroes” restricted the free movement of Africans and denied men the right to carry weapons, Craven,*History of Bermuda,*94. Simon P. Newman,*A New World of Labor: The Development of Plantation Slavery in the British Atlantic*(Philadelphia: 2013), 189–257; John Wareing,*Indentured Migration and the Servant Trade from London to America, 1619–1718*(Oxford: 2017), 42.

[26.](chapter_03.md#en0103) Vaughan,*Roots of American Racism,*157; Hotten,*The Original Lists,*172–174, 178, 182, 185.

[27.](chapter_03.md#en0104) Hotten,*The Original Lists,*180, 204, 205, 209, 211, 212, 217, 218, 222, 235, 239, 258, 261; Joyce E. Chaplin, “Race,” in*The British Atlantic World, 1500–1800,*ed. David Armitage and Michael J. Braddick (New York: 2002), 154–172; William Waller Hening, ed.,*The Statutes at Large Being a Collection of All the Laws of Virginia.…,*13 vols. (Charlottesville, VA: 1969), 1:146; Rebecca Anne Goetz,*The Baptism of Early Virginia: How Christianity Created Race*(Baltimore: 2012), 73, 78–79.

[28.](chapter_03.md#en0105) Kathleen M. Brown,*Good Wives, Nasty Wenches, and Anxious Patriarchs: Gender, Race, and Power in Colonial Virginia*(Chapel Hill, NC: 1996), 116–133; McIlwaine,*Minutes of the Council and General Court,*477; Coombs, “Building the Machine,” 138–150; Hening,*Statutes at Large,*1:226, 242, 292, 2:170, 195, 260, 267, 270, 280–281, 288, 299–300.

[29.](chapter_03.md#en0106) Morgan, “Virginia Slavery.”

[30.](chapter_03.md#en0107) Eltis and Richardson estimate 388,000 Africans arrived in British North America, 1619–1860,*Atlas of the Transatlantic Slave Trade,*89, 200, 205, map 137; Heywood and Thornton,*Angolans, Atlantic Creoles,*169–293; Michael Mullin,*Africa in America: Slave Acculturation and Resistance in the American South and the British Caribbean, 1736–1831*(Urbana, Il: 1992), 13–74; Philip D. Morgan,*Slave Counterpoint: Black Culture in the Eighteenth-Century Chesapeake and Lowcountry*(Chapel Hill, NC: 1998), part 3; Sweet,*Recreating Africa,*passim.

[31.](chapter_03.md#en0108) The site of Captain William Pierce’s house and his three- to four-acre lot on Jamestown Island where Angela lived in 1624 and 1625 still exists. It has been the subject of recent archaeological excavations and research by the National Park Service in collaboration with the Jamestown Rediscovery archaeological team led by David Givens.

Chapter 4: Commonwealth

[1.](chapter_04.md#en0109) Susan Myra Kingsbury, ed.,*The Records of the Virginia Company of London*(hereafter*RVC*), 4 vols. (Washington, DC: 1906–1935), 1:423, 3:307. Sir Thomas Gates and Sir Thomas Dale had earlier attempted to found a civil society “based on labor, worship, and Christian morality,” backed by strict discipline and martial law that had failed; see Edward L. Bond,*Damned Souls in a Tobacco Colony: Religion on Seventeenth-Century Virginia*(Macon, GA: 2000), 83–92.

[2.](chapter_04.md#en0110) Glenn Burgess, “England and Scotland,” in*European Political Thought, 1450–1700: Religion, Law and Philosophy,*ed. Howell A. Lloyd, Glenn Burgess, and Simon Hodson (New Haven, CT: 2007), 336–337; Glenn Burgess,*British Political Thought, 1500–1660*(London: 2009), 19–20, 22, 26; Andy Wood,*Riot, Rebellion, and Popular Politics in Early Modern England*(New York: 2002), 25–26;*The Boke Named the Gouernour Devised by Sir T. E., Knyght*(London: 2010); C. H. Williams, ed.,*English Historical Documents, 1485–1558*(London: 1971), 295–302; David Rollison,*A Commonwealth of the People: Popular Politics and England’s Long Social Revolution, 1066–1649*(Cambridge: 2010), passim. Expressed in many different forms over the course of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, humanist or neo-Roman thought evolved as the application of ancient Greek and Roman learning to contemporary issues and policy, particularly in matters of governance, law, and the well-being of society; see Burgess,*British Political Thought,*1–27; Andrew Fitzmaurice,*Humanism and America: An Intellectual History of English Colonization, 1500–1625*(Cambridge: 2003), 1–19; Andrew Fitzmaurice, “‘Every Man, That Prints, Adventures’: The Rhetoric of the Virginia Company Sermons,” in*The English Sermon Revised: Religion, History and Literature, 1600–1750,*ed. Lori Anne Ferrell and Peter McCullough (Manchester: 2000), 24–42.

[3.](chapter_04.md#en0111) Francis Grigor, ed.,*Sir John Fortescue’s Commendation of the Laws of England: The Translation into English of De Laudibus Legnum Angliae*(London: 1917), 16, 22, 26–28, 56–63; Thomas Smith,*De Republica Anglorum,*ed. Mary Dewar (Cambridge: 1982), 49, 57, 78, 88; Henry S. Turner, “Corporations: Humanism and Elizabethan Political Economy,” in*Mercantilism Reimagined: Political Economy in Early Modern Britain and its Empire,*ed. Philip J. Stern and Carl Wennerlind (Oxford: 2014), 156–161; Burgess, “England and Scotland,” 339–342, 352–353; Glenn Burgess,*The Politics of the Ancient Constitution: An Introduction to English Political Thought 1603–1642*(University Park, PA: 1992); Steve Hindle,*The State and Social Change in Early Modern England, 1550–1640*(New York: 2002), 24–27.

[4.](chapter_04.md#en0112) Wood,*Riot, Rebellion, and Popular Politics,*29–89; Mark Nicholls,*A History of the Modern British Isles, 1529–1603: The Two Kingdoms*(Oxford: 1999), 113–161; Anthony Fletcher and Diarmaid MacCulloch,*Tudor Rebellions,*5th ed. (London: 2008), 28–101; Ethan H. Shagan,*Popular Politics and the English Reformation*(Cambridge: 2002), passim; C. H. Williams, ed.,*English Historical Documents, 1485–1558*(London: 1971), 268–273, 293–333; Burgess,*British Political Thought,*20–25.

[5.](chapter_04.md#en0113) Rollison,*Commonwealth of the People,*342–350; Phil Withington,*Society in Early Modern England: The Vernacular Origins of Some Powerful Ideas*(Cambridge: 2010), 143, 149–150; Lloyd, Burgess, and Hodson,*European Political Thought,*337–338; Williams,*English Historical Documents,*268–273, 293–333; Thomas Smith,*A Discourse of the Common Weal of this Realm of England,*ed. Elizabeth Lamond (Cambridge: 1929), 1, 57–59; Henry S. Turner,*The Corporate Commonwealth: Pluralism and Political Fictions in England, 1516–1651*(Chicago: 2016), ch. 2; Keith Wrightson,*Earthly Necessities: Economic Lives in Early Modern Britain*(New Haven, CT: 2000), 149–158.

[6.](chapter_04.md#en0114) David Beers Quinn, ed.,*The Voyages and Colonizing Enterprises of Sir Humphrey Gilbert,*2 vols. (London: 1940), 2:361; Richard Hakluyt was known as*the younger*to distinguish him from his older cousin of the same name,*Divers Voyages Touching the Discovery of America.*… (London: 1582), 8; E. G. R. Taylor, ed.,*The Original Writings and Correspondence of the Two Richard Hakluyts,*2 vols. (London: 1935), 2:233–234, 315; Jack P. Greene,*The Intellectual Construction of America: Exceptionalism and Identity from 1492 to 1800*(Chapel Hill, NC: 1993), 39–46. See, for example,*Ease for Overseers of the Poor*(London: 1601), Gerard de Malynes,*Saint George for England, Allegorically Described*(London: 1601), and Francis Trigge,*To the Kings Most Excellent Majestie: The Humble Petition of Two Sisters the Church and Common-wealth: For the Restoring of Their Ancient Commons and Liberties, which Late Inclosure with Depopulation, Uncharitably Hath Taken Away*(London: 1604).

[7.](chapter_04.md#en0115) Withington,*Politics of Commonwealth;*Andrew Fitzmaurice, “The Company*–*Commonwealth,” in*Virginia 1619: Slavery, Freedom, and the Construction of English America,*ed. Paul Musselwhite, James Horn, and Peter C. Mancall (Chapel Hill, NC: forthcoming); Alexander B. Haskell,*For God, King, and People: Forging Commonwealth Bonds in Renaissance Virginia*(Chapel Hill, NC: 2017), 106–198.

[8.](chapter_04.md#en0116) Wood,*Riot, Rebellion, and Popular Politics,*25–28; Williams,*English Historical Documents,*268, 295–296; Burgess,*Ancient Constitution,*5–6, 131–134; Burgess,*British Political Thought,*20–25, 96–97; Alexander B. Haskell, “‘The Affections of the People’: Ideology and the Politics of State Building in Colonial Virginia, 1607–1754,” (PhD diss., Johns Hopkins University, 2004), 25–26; FP 121, July 1619,*VCA,*“A Project from M[aste]r Caswell for Creating Noblemen in Virginia,” cited by Lauren Working. Robert Gray,*Good Speede to Virginia*(London: 1609), Dr. Gray was rector of St. Benet Sherehog and neighbor of John Ferrar, the deputy treasurer of the Virginia Company in Sithes Lane, London; FP 166, April 1620,*VCA.*

[9.](chapter_04.md#en0117) Theodore K. Rabb,*Enterprise and Empire: Merchant and Gentry Investment in the Expansion of England, 1575–1630*(Cambridge, MA: 1967), 22–101, 104, 128; Samuel M. Bemiss,*The Three Charters of the Virginia Company of London… 1606–1621*(Williamsburg, VA: 1957), 28–42, 79–85; Kingsbury,*RVC,*3:231–232, 317–340; Lauren Working, “‘The Savages of Virginia Our Project’: The Powhatan in Jacobean Political Thought,” in*Virginia 1619,*ed. Musselwhite, Horn, and Mancall. Nonetheless, rumblings of disapproval about Yeardley’s appointment continued to surface in both London and Jamestown, see for example a petition sent to the Company’s Council in 1619/1620 from “sundry ancient adventurers” requesting “some man of quality sent [to be] governor into Virginia,”*VCRP*, SR 1106, number 247, from the Manchester Papers.

[10.](chapter_04.md#en0118) H. R. McIlwaine, ed.,*Journals of the House of Burgesses of Virginia, 1619–1658/59*(Richmond, VA: 1915), 36; Cicero,*On the Commonwealth,*trans. George Holland Sabine and Stanley Barney Smith (New York: 1976), bk. 2, XLII; Haskell,*For God, King, and People,*196–198.

[11.](chapter_04.md#en0119) Edmund Spenser,*A Veue of the Present State of Irelande, 1596*, Rawlinson MS, Renascence Editions, University of Oregon (1997). Spenser attended the same school as Sandys, Merchant Taylors, London. Audrey Horning,*Ireland in the Virginia Sea: Colonialism in the British Atlantic*(Chapel Hill, NC: 2013), 244–253; Paul Philip Musselwhite, “Towns in Mind: Urban Plans, Political Culture, and Empire in the Colonial Chesapeake, 1607–1722,” (PhD diss., College of William and Mary, 2011), 33–36; David Armitage,*The Ideological Origins of the British Empire*(Cambridge: 2000), 48–55; Robert Johnson,*Nova Britannia.*… in*New American World: A Documentary History of North America to 1612,*5 vols., ed. David B. Quinn (New York: 1979), 5:246–247; Andrew Fitzmaurice, “The Commercial Ideology of Colonization in Jacobean England: Robert Johnson, Giovanni Botero, and the Pursuit of Greatness,”*William and Mary Quarterly*(hereafter*WMQ*), 3d ser., 64 (2007): 791–820; Phil Withington,*The Politics of Commonwealth: Citizens and Freemen in Early Modern England*(Cambridge: 2008), 66; Francis Trigge,*The Humble Petition of Two Sisters: The Church and the Common-wealth.*… (London: 1604).

[12.](chapter_04.md#en0120) Musselwhite, “Towns in Mind,” 43; Withington,*Politics of Commonwealth,*11, 87–123; Diego Quaglioni and Vittor Ivo Comparato, “Italy,” in*European Political Thought,*ed. Lloyd, Burgess, and Hodson, 92; Tuck,*Philosophy and Government,*67.

[13.](chapter_04.md#en0121) Kingsbury,*RVC,*3:100, 209; Martha W. McCartney,*Virginia Immigrants and Adventurers, 1607–1635: A Biographical Dictionary*(Baltimore: 2007), 30–31, 35–74; Ralph Hamor,*A True Discourse of the Present State of Virginia*(London: 1615), 29–34; John Rolfe,*A True Relation of the State of Virginia Lefte by Sir Thomas Dale Knight in May Last 1616*(Charlottesville, VA: 1971), 9–10; William M. Kelso,*Jamestown: The Truth Revealed*(Charlottesville, VA: 2017), passim.

[14.](chapter_04.md#en0122) Kingsbury,*RVC,*1:256, 270, 3:259, 307–312, 493; Robert C. Johnson, “The Transportation of Vagrant Children from London to Virginia, 1618–1622,” in*Early Stuart Studies: Essays in Honor of David Harris Wilson,*ed. Howard S. Reinmuth Jr. (Minneapolis, MN: 1970), 137–151; Paul Griffiths,*Lost Londons: Change, Crime, and Control in the Capital City, 1550–1660*(Cambridge: 2008), 284–286; Thomas Scanlan,*Colonial Writing and the New World, 1583–1671: Allegories of Desire*(Cambridge: 1999), 119–121; Edward Wright Haile, ed.,*Jamestown Narratives: Eyewitness Accounts of the Virginia Colony: The First Decade, 1607–1617*(Champlain, VA: 1998), 718–720; Gray,*Good Speede,*B2v, B3v.

[15.](chapter_04.md#en0123) Kingsbury,*RVC,*1:258, 392–393, 420, 446, 483, 3:278, 315, 474, 477, 502, 581–581, 634, 640, 651, 661, 4:23–24, 174–182; J. C. Harrington,*Glassmaking at Jamestown: America’s First Industry*(Richmond, VA: 1952), 9–10.

[16.](chapter_04.md#en0124) David R. Ransome, ‘“Shipt for Virginia’: The Beginnings in 1619–1623 of the Great Migration to the Chesapeake,”*VMHB*103 (1995): 443–458; David R. Ransome, “Wives for Virginia, 1621,”*WMQ,*3d ser., 43 (1991): 3–18; FP 306, August 1621,*VCA;*FP 309, September 1621,*VCA.*

[17.](chapter_04.md#en0125) Kingsbury,*RVC,*3:99–101.

[18.](chapter_04.md#en0126) FP 93, December 5, 1618,*VCA.*

[19.](chapter_04.md#en0127) Kingsbury,*RVC,*1:266–267, 3:307–312; Samuel Purchas,*Hakluytus Posthumus, or His Pilgrimes: Contayning a History of the World in Sea Voyages and Lande Travells by Englishmen and Others,*20 vols. (Glasgow: 1905), 19:150.

[20.](chapter_04.md#en0128) At Berkeley Hundred, a private plantation founded in 1619, four hundred acres of common land was to be fenced and used for growing corn, wheat, tobacco, and vines as well as for housing cattle sent by the Berkeley Company, Kingsbury,*RVC,*1:270–271, 3:200. Wrightson,*Earthly Necessities,*149–155; Williams,*English Historical Documents,*268–273, 293–333;*Journal of the Common Council of London, 1618,*ff. 374v. The children served as servants (apprentices) until twenty-one or until the girls married and were then placed on Company lands as tenants, at which time they would receive a house with corn and cattle and earn half the yearly profit.

[21.](chapter_04.md#en0129) The site of the first Anglican Church built in America (1608) was discovered at Jamestown in 2010 by William M. Kelso and the Jamestown Rediscovery team of archaeologists; see Kelso,*The Truth Revealed,*167–184. The second church of 1617–1618 has also been investigated by the Jamestown team led by Mary Anna Hartley. FP 93, December 5, 1618,*VCA;*Kingsbury,*RVC,*3:164–165, 172–173, 208–209, 276–277.

[22.](chapter_04.md#en0130) Matthew 22:37–40; Withington,*Society in Early Modern England,*138–139; Eamon Duffy,*The Stripping of the Altars: Traditional Religion in England, 1400–1580,*2nd ed. (New Haven, CT: 2005), 92–95,131–154; Rollison,*A Commonwealth of the People,*163–165.

[23.](chapter_04.md#en0131) Fitzmaurice, “Every Man, That Prints, Adventures,” 24–42; Alexander Brown,*The Genesis of the United States,*2 vols. (Boston: 1891), 1:366, 368, 369; John Parker, “Religion and the Virginia Colony, 1609–10,” in*The Westward Enterprise: English activities in Ireland, the Atlantic and America, 1480–1650,*ed. K. R. Andrews, N. P. Canny, and P. E. H. Hair (Liverpool: 1978), 247–248, 257; Rebecca Anne Goetz,*The Baptism of Early Virginia: How Christianity Created Race*(Baltimore: 2012), 21–34; Bond,*Damned Souls,*1–29; James Horn,*A Land as God Made It: Jamestown and the Birth of America*(New York: 2005), 138–141; Avihu Zakai,*Exile and Kingdom: History and Apocalypse in the Puritan Migration to America*(Cambridge: 1992), 61–68, 94–115; Scanlan,*Colonial Writing,*93–122; Douglas Bradburn, “The Eschatological Origins of the English Empire,” in*Early Modern Virginia: Reconsidering the Old Dominion,*ed. Douglas Bradburn and John C. Coombs (Charlottesville, VA: 2011), 17–36.

[24.](chapter_04.md#en0132) Hooker’s quotation is cited in Bond,*Damned Souls,*57. In fact, Sandys and the Company did not scruple at encouraging former Leiden Separatists (Pilgrims) and other Puritans to settle in Virginia.

[25.](chapter_04.md#en0133) W. B. Patterson,*King James VI and I and the Reunion of Christendom*(Cambridge: 1997), 1, 26, 34, 260–364; Louis B. Wright,*Religion and Empire: The Alliance between Piety and Commerce in English Expansion, 1558–1625*(Chapel Hill, NC: 1943), 107; Fitzmaurice, “The Commercial Ideology of Colonization,” 791–820.

[26.](chapter_04.md#en0134) Rabb,*Jacobean Gentleman,*18–46, esp. 38; [Edwin Sandys],*A Relation of the State of Religion… in the Severall States of Those Westerne Parts of the Worlde*(London: 1605), R3ii–R3iii.

[27.](chapter_04.md#en0135) Hamor,*True Discourse,*11–16; Purchas,*Hakluytus Posthumus,*19:106–107.

[28.](chapter_04.md#en0136) Kingsbury,*RVC,*1:538–541, 3:102, 128–129, 147, 165–166, 276–277.

[29.](chapter_04.md#en0137) FP 93, December 5, 1618,*VCA;*Patterson,*King James VI and I,*260–292; Kingsbury,*RVC,*1:247–248, 278–279.

[30.](chapter_04.md#en0138) Kingsbury,*RVC,*1:379, 3:123–124, 305, 307, 379–381, 397–400, 446–448, 469–470, 584. Eric Gethyn-Jones,*George Thorpe and the Berkeley Company: A Gloucestershire Enterprise in Virginia*(Gloucester, England: 1982), 153–158, 168–174, 181–185, 188–189, 224–227.

[31.](chapter_04.md#en0139) Smith’s citing of Utopia was a reference to Sir Thomas More’s book of the same name; see David Armitage,*The Ideological Origins of the British Empire*(Cambridge: 2000), 50. For the Smiths’ venture in Ards Peninsula, Ulster, see Horning,*Ireland in the Virginia Sea,*65–68, and Hiram Morgan, “The Colonial Venture of Sir Thomas Smith in Ulster, 1571–1575,”*Historical Journal*28 (1985): 261–278. Smith was the same man who wrote*De Republica Anglorum.*

[32.](chapter_04.md#en0140) Kingsbury,*RVC,*3:537, 546; Purchas,*Hakluytus Posthumus,*19:149; David B. Quinn, ed., “A List of Books Purchased for the Virginia Company,”*VMHB*77 (1969): 347–360.

Chapter 5: Tumult and Liberty

[1.](chapter_05.md#en0141) Susan Myra Kingsbury, ed.,*The Records of the Virginia Company of London*(hereafter*RVC*), 4 vols. (Washington, DC: 1906–1935), 1:613, 628–629, 3:581–589. The General Assembly met in late November and early December 1621, shortly after Wyatt arrived in the colony. Patrick Copland,*Virginia’s God be Thanked, or a Sermon of Thanksgiving for the Happie Successe of the Affayres in Virginia this Last Yeare*(London: 1622).

[2.](chapter_05.md#en0142) Kingsbury,*RVC,*3:551; Philip L. Barbour, ed.,*The Complete Works of Captain John Smith,*3 vols. (Chapel Hill, NC: 1986), 2:293–298. The Reverend Joseph Mead, an influential scholar of religion at Christ College, Cambridge, reported in mid-July that between 300 and 329 settlers were killed; later he suggested 340; Robert C. Johnson, “The Indians Massacre of 1622: Some Correspondence of the Reverend Joseph Mead,”*Virginia Magazine of History and Biography*(hereafter*VMHB*) 71 (1963): 408–409. The fullest account of the attack is by J. Frederick Fausz, “The Powhatan Uprising of 1622: A Historical Study of Ethnocentrism and Cultural Conflict” (PhD diss., College of William and Mary, 1977), 353–403.

[3.](chapter_05.md#en0143) Kingsbury,*RVC,*3:612.

[4.](chapter_05.md#en0144) Kingsbury,*RVC,*3:666–667; Robert C. Johnson, “A Poem on the Late Massacre in Virginia by Christopher Brooke,”*VMHB*72 (1964): 262; Fausz, “Powhatan Uprising,” 431–434.

[5.](chapter_05.md#en0145) Kingsbury,*RVC,*3:623, 656–657, 4:38, 41, 58, 515–516; Barbour,*Complete Works,*2:308.

[6.](chapter_05.md#en0146) Kingsbury,*RVC,*3:564, 669–671, 683.

[7.](chapter_05.md#en0147) Diarmaid MacCulloch,*The Reformation: A History*(New York: 2005), 337–340; Geoffrey Parker describes the “sack of Antwerp” as one of the “worst atrocities of the sixteenth century,” in*The Dutch Revolt*(Ithaca, NY: 1977), 178; Jonathan I. Israel,*The Dutch Republic: Its Rise, Greatness, and Fall, 1477–1806*(Oxford: 1995), 185; Eugene Lyon,*The Enterprise of Florida: Pedro Menéndez de Avilés and the Spanish Conquest of 1565–1568*(Gainesville, FL: 1976), 100–130; John T. McGrath,*The French in Early Florida: In the Eye of the Hurricane*(Gainesville, FL: 2000), 133–155; Johnson, “The Indians Massacre of 1622,” 408–409.

[8.](chapter_05.md#en0148) Kingsbury,*RVC,*3:542, 550–551, 553, 559, 666. Tzvetan Todorov,*The Conquest of America: The Question of the Other*(New York: 1984), 50; Peter Hulme,*Colonial Encounters: Europe and the Native Caribbean, 1492–1797*(London: 1986), 45–87, 138–173; Anthony Pagden,*European Encounters with the New World: From Renaissance to Romanticism*(New Haven, CT: 1993), passim; Jack P. Greene,*The Intellectual Construction of America: Exceptionalism and Identity from 1492–1800*(Chapel Hill, NC: 1993), 15–25; Karen Ordahl Kupperman,*Indians and English: Facing Off in Early America*(Ithaca, NY: 2000), 16–74; David Beers Quinn, ed.,*The Roanoke Voyages, 1584–1590,*2 vols. (London: 1955), 1:108.

[9.](chapter_05.md#en0149) Kingsbury,*RVC,*3:556–560, 562–563; Fausz, “Powhatan Uprising,” 421–432; Bartolomé de Las Casas,*An Account, Much Abbreviated, of the Destruction of the Indies, with Related Texts,*ed. Franklin W. Knight (Indianapolis, IN: 2003), 2–86; “Letter of Sir Francis Wyatt, Governor of Virginia, 1621–1626,”*William and Mary Quarterly*(hereafter*WMQ*), 2d ser., 6 (1926): 118–119. The brief history of the*Destruction of the Indies*and*History of the Indies*were published in 1552 and 1566, respectively. During the second half of the century, both were translated into other languages, including English, and were highly influential. Las Casas provided a scathing critique of what he viewed as the sadistic violence inflicted by Spanish colonists on innocent Indian peoples in the Americas, which he witnessed firsthand. For an account of the violence of Hernando de Soto’s expedition and the subsequent collapse of Mississippian society in the mid-sixteenth century, see Robbie Ethridge,*From Chicaza to Chickasaw: The European Invasion and the Transformation of the Mississippian World, 1540–1715*(Chapel Hill, NC: 2010), 42–59; April Lee Hatfield, “Spanish Colonization Literature, Powhatan Geographies, and English Perceptions of Tsenacommacah/Virginia,”*Journal of Southern History*69 (2003): 277–278.

[10.](chapter_05.md#en0150) Johnson, “A Poem on the Late Massacre,” 282–292; Fausz, “Powhatan Uprising,” 434; Alden T. Vaughan,*Roots of American Racism: Essays on the Colonial Experience*(Oxford: 1995), 124.

[11.](chapter_05.md#en0151) Hulme,*Colonial Encounters,*154.

[12.](chapter_05.md#en0152) Pope Alexander VI’s three bulls (charters) of the 1490s provided the legal basis of Spain’s claim to the Americas, together with first discovery and conquest. See Anthony Pagden,*Lords of All the World: Ideologies of Empire in Spain, Britain and France, c. 1500–c. 1800*(New Haven, CT: 1995), 29–52; James Muldoon, “Papal Responsibility for the Infidel: Another Look at Alexander VI’s*Inter Caetera,*”*Catholic Historical Review*64 (1978): 168–184; David Beers Quinn, ed.,*The Voyages and Colonizing Enterprises of Sir Humphrey Gilbert,*2 vols. (London: 1940), 2:450, 453; Robert Johnson,*Nova Britannia.*… (London: 1609); Robert Gray,*Good Speede to Virginia*(London: 1609), sig. C3iv. For an overview, see Stuart Banner,*How the Indians Lost Their Land: Law and Power on the Frontier*(Cambridge, MA: 2007), passim.

[13.](chapter_05.md#en0153) Kingsbury,*RVC,*3:671–673, 683, 4:451; Hulme,*Colonial Encounters,*172.

[14.](chapter_05.md#en0154) Kingsbury,*RVC,*2:678, 4:9–10; Barbour,*Complete Works,*2:310.

[15.](chapter_05.md#en0155) Geoffrey Parker,*The Military Revolution: Military Innovation and the Rise of the West, 1500–1800,*2nd ed. (Cambridge: 1996), 6–44; Kingsbury,*RVC,*3:665, 676, 678–679; D. A. Tisdale,*Soldiers of the Virginia Colony, 1607–1699: A Study of Virginia’s Military, Its Origins, Tactics, Equipment, and Development*(Petersburg, VA: 2000), 1–31, 81–161. Archaeological investigations at James Fort, Jamestown, have unearthed armor, weapons, and arrow points that confirm the arms sent from the Tower of London arrived. For broader perspectives, see John McGurk,*The Elizabethan Conquest of Ireland: The 1590s Crisis*(New York: 1997), 227–235, and Guy Chet,*Conquering the American Wilderness: The Triumph of European Warfare in the Colonial Northeast*(Boston: 2003).

[16.](chapter_05.md#en0156) Kingsbury,*RVC,*2:482, 486, 4:61, 89, 98, 102, 108–109, 221–222, 507–508; Barbour,*Complete Works,*2:320–321; Johnson, “The Indians Massacre of 1622,” 410; Fausz, “Powhatan Uprising,” 487–490, 493, 509–512. Opechancanough mounted one last attack in 1644, during which approximately four hundred to five hundred settlers were killed.

[17.](chapter_05.md#en0157) H. R. McIlwaine, ed.,*Journals of the House of Burgesses of Virginia, 1619–1658/59*(Richmond, VA: 1915), 38; Samuel Purchas,*Hakluytus Posthumus, or Purchas His Pilgrims.…,*20 vols. (Glasgow: 1905–1907), 19:224, 228–231, 246, 266; Hulme,*Colonial Encounters,*158.

[18.](chapter_05.md#en0158) Kingsbury,*RVC,*3:672, 705–707; C. S. Everett, “‘They Shalbe Slaves for Their Lives’: Indian Slavery in Colonial Virginia,” in*Indian Slavery in Colonial America,*ed. Alan Gallay (Lincoln, NE: 2009), 69; Kristalyn Marie Shefveland,*Anglo-Native Virginia: Trade, Conversion, and Indian Slavery in the Old Dominion, 1646–1722*(Athens, GA: 2016), 6–79; H. R. McIlwaine, ed.,*Minutes of the Council and General Court of Colonial Virginia,*2nd ed. (Richmond, VA: 1979), 111; Andrés Reséndez,*The Other Slavery: The Uncovered Story of Indian Enslavement in America*(New York: 2016), passim.

[19.](chapter_05.md#en0159) Helen C. Rountree,*Pocahontas’s People: The Powhatan Indians of Virginia Through Four Centuries*(Norman, OK: 1990), 84–91.

[20.](chapter_05.md#en0160) Kingsbury,*RVC,*2:325.

[21.](chapter_05.md#en0161) Kingsbury,*RVC,*2:375, 4:65, 147, 151, 160–161, 216, 231–235; Wesley Frank Craven,*Dissolution of the Virginia Company: The Failure of a Colonial Government*(Gloucester, MA: 1964), 200–220. George Sandys estimated no fewer than five hundred settlers died from an “extreme sickness” during the bitterly cold winter of 1623, a figure later adopted by royal commissioners sent to investigate the colony.

[22.](chapter_05.md#en0162) Rabb,*Jacobean Gentleman,*241–269; Robert Zaller,*The Discourse of Legitimacy in Early Modern England*(Stanford, CA: 2007), 610–620; Thomas Cogswell,*The Blessed Revolution: English Politics and the Coming of War, 1621–1624*(Cambridge: 1989), 12–53, 298; S. L. Adams, “Foreign Policy and the Parliaments of 1621 and 1624,” in*Faction and Parliament: Essays on Early Stuart History,*ed. Kevin Sharpe (Oxford: 1978), 146–147; Geoffrey Parker,*Global Crisis: War, Climate Change and Catastrophe in the Seventeenth Century*(New Haven, CT: 2103), 211; W. B. Patterson,*King James VI and I and the Reunion of Christendom*(Cambridge: 1997), 293–335; Alastair Bellany and Thomas Cogswell,*The Murder of King James I*(New Haven, CT: 2015), 1–5; Geoffrey Parker, ed.,*The Thirty Years’ War,*2nd ed. (London: 1997), 43–61; Patrick Collinson,*The Birthpangs of Protestant England: Religious and Cultural Change in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries*(London: 1988), 5, 17; Avihu Zakai,*Exile and Kingdom: History and the Apocalypse in the Puritan Migration to America*(Cambridge: 1992), 109–118; John Donne,*A Sermon Upon the VIII Verse of the 1: Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles*(London: 1622).

[23.](chapter_05.md#en0163) Pauline Croft,*King James*(Basingstoke: 2003), 103–121; Patterson,*King James VI and I,*309; G. P. V. Akrigg, ed.,*Letters of King James VI and I*(Berkeley, CA: 1984), 377–378; Conrad Russell,*The Fall of the British Monarchies, 1637–1642*(Oxford: 1991), 100–123, 206–236.

[24.](chapter_05.md#en0164) Noel Malcolm, “Hobbes, Sandys, and the Virginia Company,”*Historical Journal*24 (1981): 300–301; [Arthur Wodenoth],*A Short Collection of the Most Remarkable Passages from the originall to the dissolution of the Virginia Company*(London: 1651), 18–19; Peter Peckard,*Memoirs of the Life of Mr. Nicholas Ferrar*(Cambridge: 1790), 115–116, 144; Alexander Brown,*The First Republic of America: An Account of the Origins of the Nation.*… (New York: 1898), 269–270, 439–440; Cogswell,*Blessed Revolution,*302–307; Craven,*Dissolution of the Virginia Company,*9–11, 319–320. Craven is right to be skeptical about placing too much emphasis on the influence of Gondomar in bringing about the collapse of the Company, but it is clear from reports of 1625, as well as accounts from several decades later during the Interregnum, when it was safe to publish criticisms of Stuart foreign policy (Wodenoth above), that he played a prominent role in promoting James’s pro-Spanish policy and was extremely hostile toward Virginia and Bermuda; see, for example, Kingsbury,*RVC,*4:539–540.

[25.](chapter_05.md#en0165) Alexander B. Haskell,*For God, King, and People: Forging Commonwealth Bonds in Renaissance Virginia*(Chapel Hill, NC: 2017), 192–213, 218–220, 233–234; David Underdown,*A Freeborn People: Politics and the Nation in Seventeenth-Century England*(Oxford: 1996), 20–44; Robert Zaller,*The Parliament of 1621: A Study in Constitutional Conflict*(Berkeley, CA: 1971); Conrad Russell,*King James VI & I and His English Parliaments,*ed. Richard Cust and Andrew Thrush (Oxford: 2012), 177–187; Cogswell,*Blessed Revolution,*17–20.

[26.](chapter_05.md#en0166) Kingsbury,*RVC,*4:223–224; Martha W. McCartney,*Virginia Immigrants and Adventurers, 1607–1635: A Biographical Dictionary*(Baltimore: 2007), 109–110; Haskell,*For God, King, and People,*225–227.

[27.](chapter_05.md#en0167) Kingsbury,*RVC,*4:194–195; Rabb,*Jacobean Gentleman,*320–321; Malcolm Gaskill,*Between Two Worlds: How the English Became Americans*(New York: 2014), 61–64; Horn,*Land as God Made It,*241–243; Thomas Locke to William Trumbull, August 28, 1618, Berkshire Record Office, Trumbull Manuscripts,*VCRP,*07127, no. 101.

[28.](chapter_05.md#en0168) Kingsbury,*RVC,*1:336, 3:155, 177.

[29.](chapter_05.md#en0169) Kingsbury,*RVC,*4:416; Cicero,*On Obligations,*trans. P. G. Walsh (Oxford: 2000), 80. John Bargrave,*A Treatise Shewing Howe to Erect a Publique and Increasing Treasurie, A Commentary on the Lawes of Virginia*(ca. 1622), the Henry E. Huntington Library, Huntington Mss. HM 962. I am most grateful to Paul Musselwhite for sharing his transcript of the document.

[30.](chapter_05.md#en0170) Kingsbury,*RVC,*4:408–411, 424–429; Peter Thompson, “Aristotle and King Alfred in America,” in*Thomas Jefferson, the Classical World, and Early America,*ed. Peter S. Onuf and Nicholas P. Cole (Charlottesville, VA: 2011), 200–205; Haskell,*For God, King, and People,*227–232. From internal evidence, the “*Polisie*” appears to have been written before news of the Indian massacre reached England. It was one of a series of tracts on a variety of topics penned by Bargrave (I owe this point to Paul Musselwhite).

[31.](chapter_05.md#en0171) Kingsbury,*RVC,*4:415–416, 424–429.

[32.](chapter_05.md#en0172) Craven,*Dissolution of the Virginia Company,*276–285; Kingsbury,*RVC,*2:358–359. See, for example, Cicero,*On the Commonwealth,*trans. George Holland Sabine and Stanley Barney Smith (New York: 1976), 133–134, and Francis Grigor, ed.,*Sir John Fortescue’s Commendation of the Laws of England: The Translation into English of De Laudibus Legnum Angliae*(London: 1917), 28, 59–61; Andrew Fitzmaurice, “The Company–Commonwealth,” in*Virginia 1619: Slavery, Freedom, and the Construction of English America,*ed. Paul Musselwhite, James Horn, and Peter C. Mancall (Chapel Hill, NC: forthcoming).

[33.](chapter_05.md#en0173) Kingsbury,*RVC,*1:423; Thomas Cary Johnson, introduction to*A Proclamation for Setling the Plantation of Virginia*(Charlottesville, VA: 1946). Despite Charles I’s remarks concerning commercial companies and their fitness to undertake “state-affaires,” he continued to grant charters, as for example to the New England Company in 1628 and the Massachusetts Bay Company the following year.

[34.](chapter_05.md#en0174) Kingsbury,*RVC,*2:359. By adventurers, the Company meant investors and colonists. Paul Christianson, “Ancient Constitution in the Age of Sir Edward Coke and John Selden,” in*The Roots of Liberty: Magna Carta, Ancient Constitution, and the Anglo-American Tradition of the Rule of Law,*ed. Ellis Sandoz (Columbia, MO: 1993), 122–125.

[35.](chapter_05.md#en0175) Kingsbury,*RVC,*4:582; Thomas J. Wertenbaker,*Virginia Under the Stuarts, 1607–1688*(New York: 1958), 62; Glenn Burgess,*The Politics of the Ancient Constitution: An Introduction to English Political Thought 1603–1642*(University Park, PA: 1992), 181; Zaller,*Discourse of Legitimacy,*620–700; Stephen D. White,*Sir Edward Coke and “the Grievances of the Commonwealth,” 1621–1628*(Chapel Hill, NC: 1979), 213–275; J. H. Baker,*The Reinvention of Magna Carta, 1216–1616*(Cambridge: 2017), 335–409; Kevin Sharpe,*The Personal Rule of Charles I*(New Haven, CT: 1992), passim. See also J. R. Tanner,*English Constitutional Conflicts of the Seventeenth Century, 1603–1689*(Cambridge: 1962), 68–70.

[36.](chapter_05.md#en0176) Sir Robert Phelips is quoted in David Harris Sacks, “Parliament, Liberty, and the Commonweal,” in*Parliament and Liberty: From the Reign of Elizabeth to the English Civil War,*ed. J. H. Hexter (Stanford, CA: 1992), 120–121; Grigor,*Sir John Fortescue’s Commendation,*22, 55–56.

Chapter 6: Inequality and Freedom

[1.](chapter_06.md#en0177) Keith Wrightson,*Earthly Necessities: Economic Lives in Early Modern Britain*(New Haven, CT: 2000), 151; Irene W. D. Hecht, “The Virginia Muster of 1624/5 as a Source for Demographic History,”*William and Mary Quarterly*(hereafter*WMQ*), 3d ser., 30 (1973): 70–71, 77–78, 89.

[2.](chapter_06.md#en0178) Nicholas Ferrar in 1624,*Sir Thomas Smith’s Misgovernment of the Virginia Company,*ed. D. R. Ransome (Cambridge: 1990), 4–5, 7–10; Peter Wilson Coldham, “The Voyage of the Neptune to Virginia, 1618–1619, and the Disposition of Its Cargo,”*Virginia Magazine of History and Biography*(hereafter*VMHB*), 87 (1979): 30–67. Fortunately for Brewster, the sentence was commuted to banishment from Virginia.

[3.](chapter_06.md#en0179) William Thorndale, “A Passenger List of the 1619*Bona Nova,*”*Virginia Genealogical Society*33 (1995): 3–11; Philip L. Barbour, ed.,*The Complete Works of Captain John Smith,*3 vols. (Chapel Hill, NC: 1986), 2:268, 284; Susan Myra Kingsbury, ed.,*The Records of the Virginia Company of London*(hereafter*RVC*), 4 vols. (Washington, DC: 1906–1935), 1:319–329, 334–335, 3:221, 226–227, 246, 262–265, 275, 489, 536–537, 4:41, 58–59, 62, 175, 231–232, 235; Martha W. McCartney,*Virginia Immigrants and Adventurers, 1607–1635: A Biographical Dictionary*(Baltimore: 2007), 517.

[4.](chapter_06.md#en0180) James Horn,*Adapting to a New World: English Society in the Seventeenth-Century Chesapeake*(Chapel Hill, NC: 1994), 104, 118–119, 147–148, 425–427; Jack P. Greene, “The Exclusionary Legacy of Subjecthood in Making and Remaking the Atlantic World: English-Speaking America as a Case for Historical Reflection” (keynote address, Rice University, 2014), 17; Warren M. Billings,*A Little Parliament: The Virginia General Assembly in the Seventeenth Century*(Richmond, VA: 2004), 87–113, 149; Edmund S. Morgan,*American Slavery, American Freedom: The Ordeal of Colonial Virginia*(New York: 1975), 124–126; David Thomas Konig, “‘Dale’s Laws’ and the Non-Common Law Origins of Criminal Justice in Virginia,”*American Journal of Legal History*26 (1982): 369–375; Paul D. Halliday, in “Brase’s Case: Making Slave Law as Customary Law in Virginia’s General Court, 1619–1625,” in*Virginia 1619: Slavery, Freedom, and the Construction of English America,*ed. Paul Musselwhite, James Horn, and Peter C. Mancall (Chapel Hill, NC: forthcoming), puts forward a strong argument about the unchecked powers of magistrates that characterized the making of customary law in Virginia after 1619.

[5.](chapter_06.md#en0181) Kingsbury,*RVC,*3:221–222; Virginia M. Meyer and John Frederick Dorman, eds.,*Adventurers of Purse and Person: Virginia, 1607–1624/5*(Richmond, VA: 1987), 478–480; Kent History and Library Center, Maidstone, Kent, England, U269/1, OV 15, August 27, 1631; Morgan,*American Slavery, American Freedom,*108–129.

[6.](chapter_06.md#en0182) Morgan,*American Slavery, American Freedom,*124–126; Alexander B. Haskell,*For God, King, and People: Forging Commonwealth Bonds in Renaissance Virginia*(Chapel Hill, NC: 2017), 258–259; Kingsbury,*RVC,*2:325; Thomas Cary Johnson, introduction to*By the King: A Proclamation for Setling the Plantation of Virginia*(Charlottesville, VA: 1946).

[7.](chapter_06.md#en0183) Quoted in Haskell,*For God, King, and People,*262; Billings,*A Little Parliament,*12–35; Thornton J. Mills III, “The Thrusting Out of Governor Harvey: A Seventeenth-Century Rebellion,”*VMHB,*76 (1968): 11–26; Warren M. Billings, ed.,*The Old Dominion in the Seventeenth Century: A Documentary History of Virginia, 1606–1700,*rev. ed. (Chapel Hill, NC: 2007), 50, 296–299, 310–318; Douglas Bradburn, “The Visible Fist: The Chesapeake Tobacco Trade in War and the Purpose of Empire, 1690–1715,”*WMQ*68 (2011): 361–386; James D. Rice,*Tales From a Revolution: Bacon’s Rebellion and the Transformation of Early America*(Oxford: 2012).

[8.](chapter_06.md#en0184) Wesley Frank Craven,*Dissolution of the Virginia Company: The Failure of a Colonial Experiment*(Gloucester, MA: 1964), 131–136; Kingsbury,*RVC,*3:219–220.

[9.](chapter_06.md#en0185) David Wheat,*Atlantic Africa and the Spanish Caribbean, 1570–1640*(Chapel Hill, NC: 2016), 17; Philip D. Morgan, “Virginia Slavery in Atlantic Context, ca. 1550 to ca. 1650,” in*Virginia 1619,*ed. Musselwhite, Horn, and Mancall.

[10.](chapter_06.md#en0186) Philip D. Morgan,*Slave Counterpoint: Black Culture in the Eighteenth-Century Chesapeake and Lowcountry*(Chapel Hill, NC: 1998), 59–66; William Waller Hening, ed.,*The Statutes at Large Being a Collection of All the Laws of Virginia.…,*13 vols. (Charlottesville, VA: 1969), 1:270, 2:280–281, 299–300, 481–482, 491–492, 3:86–88, 102–103, 250–259, 269–270, 333–335, 447–462.

[11.](chapter_06.md#en0187) Barbados emerged as the first slave society in the English Atlantic. By 1650, the enslaved population was about thirteen thousand, a third of the population of the island; see Philip D. Morgan, “British Encounters with Africans and African-Americans, circa 1600–1780,” in*Strangers within the Realm: Cultural Margins of the First British Empire,*ed. Bernard Bailyn and Philip D. Morgan (Chapel Hill, NC: 1991),173; Morgan,*Slave Counterpoint,*xxiv; Mark G. Hanna,*Pirate Nests and the Rise of the British Empire, 1570–1740*(Chapel Hill, NC: 2015), 70–77; Carla Gardina Pestana,*The English Atlantic in an Age of Revolution, 1640–1661*(Cambridge, MA: 2004), 183–212.

[12.](chapter_06.md#en0188) John Ferrar,*A Perfect Description of Virginia.*… (London: 1649); it was evidently written either the previous year or in the first part of January 1649 since Charles I is mentioned in the text. McCartney,*Virginia Immigrants and Adventurers,*483–485; Billings,*A Little Parliament,*20–22; Kingsbury,*RVC,*2:325. Mathews had remained a stalwart supporter of the Virginia Company, served with Ferrar in the early 1630s on a royal commission (Dorset) to consider reviving it and was one of the four leading councilors who plotted to send Sir John Harvey back to England.

[13.](chapter_06.md#en0189) Glenn Burgess,*The Politics of the Ancient Constitution: An Introduction to English Political Thought, 1603–1642*(University Park, PA: 1992), 3–7; J. P. Kenyon, ed.,*The Stuart Constitution: Documents and Commentary*(Cambridge: 1969), 82–85.

[14.](chapter_06.md#en0190) Kingsbury,*RVC,*3:98–99; Ferrar Papers 93, December 5, 1618,*Virginia Company Archives,*Adam Mathew Digital (2007). As noted above, even before the collapse of the Company, and especially following, the laws and institutions put in place by Sandys’s great reforms eventually became the means by which wealthy planter elites were able to pursue their own interests largely unrestrained by the English government or royal governors often to the detriment of the poor and vulnerable, Halliday, “Brase’s Case.”

[15.](chapter_06.md#en0191) Martyn Bennett,*The Civil Wars in Britain and Ireland, 1638–1651*(Oxford: 1997), 142–255;*King Charles His Speech Made upon the Scaffold at Whitehall-Gate, Immediately before His Execution, on Tuesday the 30 of Jan. 1648*(London: 1649), 9–10; Kenyon,*Stuart Constitution,*21–23. Wat Tyler was one of the leaders of the Peasants’ Revolt of 1381 and Jack Cade the leader of the rebellion of 1450.

[16.](chapter_06.md#en0192) Thomas Hobbes,*Leviathan,*ed. C. B. Macpherson (Harmondsworth, Middlesex: 1968), 75.

[17.](chapter_06.md#en0193) John Morrill,*The Nature of the English Revolution*(London: 1993), 285–305; Austin Woolrych,*Britain in Revolution, 1625–1660*(Oxford: 2002), 234–559; Blair Worden,*The English Civil Wars, 1640–1660*(London: 2009), passim; Michael Braddick,*God’s Fury: A New History of the English Civil Wars*(London: 2009), 241–580; Pestana,*The English Atlantic,*1–117.

[18.](chapter_06.md#en0194) James T. Kloppenberg,*Toward Democracy: The Struggle for Self-Rule in European and American Thought*(Oxford: 2016), 94–363; Richard Tuck,*The Sleeping Sovereign: The Invention of Modern Democracy*(Cambridge: 2015), 63–120, 181–248.

Epilogue: After 1619

[1.](epilogue.md#en0195) Philip L. Barbour, ed.,*The Complete Works of Captain John Smith,*3 vols. (Chapel Hill, NC: 1986), 2:245. Generally, Francis Jennings,*The Invasion of America: Indians, Colonialism, and the Cant of Conquest*(Chapel Hill, NC: 1975); Jennings,*The Founders of America, from the Earliest Migrations to the Present*(New York: 1994), 233–411; Ned Blackhawk,*Violence Over the Land: Indians and Empires in the Early American West*(Cambridge, MA: 2006); Matthew Jennings,*New Worlds of Violence: Cultures and Conquests in the Early American Southeast*(Knoxville, TN: 2011); Andrés Reséndez,*The Other Slavery: The Uncovered Story of Indian Enslavement in America*(New York: 2016); Carol Smith-Rosenberg,*This Violent Empire: The Birth of an American Identity*(Chapel Hill, NC: 2010).

[2.](epilogue.md#en0196) Philip D. Morgan, “Slaves and Poverty,” in*Down and Out in Early America,*ed. Billy G. Smith (University Park, PA: 2004), 93–131; Thomas M. Shapiro,*Toxic Inequality: How America’s Wealth Gap Destroys Mobility, Deepens the Racial Divide, and Threatens Our Future*(New York: 2017), 13, and note 9, 228; Stephen M. Caliendo,*Inequality in America: Race, Poverty, and Fulfilling Democracy’s Promise,*2nd ed. (New York: 2017); Melvin Oliver and Thomas M. Shapiro,*Black Wealth / White Wealth: A New Perspective*(New York: 2006), appendix A. Douglas A. Blackmon argues persuasively that a form of quasi slavery persisted on a massive scale in the Deep South for three-quarters of a century after emancipation, see*Slavery by Another Name: The Re-Enslavement of Black Americans from the Civil War to World War II*(New York: 2008); Valerie Wilson and William D. Rodgers III, “Black-White Wage Gaps Expand with Rising Wage Inequality,”*Economic Policy Institute,*September 20, 2016; Linda M. Burton, Marybeth Mattingly, Juan Pedroza, and Whitney Welsh,*State of the Union 2017: Poverty,*Stanford Center on Poverty and Inequality (Stanford, CA: 2017); Renee Stepler, “5 Key Takeaways about Views of Race and Inequality in America,” Pew Research Center, June 27, 2016.

[3.](epilogue.md#en0197) Thomas Jefferson to Roger Weightman, Monticello June 24, 1826, in Merrill D. Peterson, ed.,*Thomas Jefferson, Writings*(New York: 1984), 1516–1517.

[4.](epilogue.md#en0198) Jack P. Greene, “The Exclusionary Legacy of Subjecthood in Making and Remaking the Atlantic World: English-Speaking America as a Case for Historical Reflection” (keynote address, Rice University, 2014), 2, 11–22, 27–30; Michael Kammen,*Deputyes and Libertyes: The Origins of Representative Government in Colonial America*(New York: 1969), passim; Michael Kammen,*Spheres of Liberty: Changing Perceptions of Liberty in American Culture*(Madison, WI: 1986), passim. The extensive powers assumed by local elites and legislatures, one of the principal institutional strengths of the British imperial system and subsequently of the American Union, carried with them opportunities for wholesale and systematic abuse of African Americans and Native Americans, see for example, David Brion Davis,*Inhuman Bondage: The Rise and Fall of Slavery in the New World*(Oxford: 2006), 298–306; Blackmon,*Slavery by Another Name;*Michelle Alexander,*The New Jim Crow: Mass Incarceration in the Age of Colorblindness*(New York: 2010); Helen C. Rountree,*Pocahontas’s People: The Powhatan Indians of Virginia Through Four Centuries*(Norman, OK: 1990), 219–242; Edwin Black,*War Against the Weak: Eugenics and America’s Campaign to Create a Master Race,*2nd ed. (Washington, DC: 2012); Nancy Isenberg,*White Trash: The 400-Year Untold History of Class in America*(New York: 2016), 192–205.

[5.](epilogue.md#en0199) Today, four states—Virginia, Kentucky, Pennsylvania, and Massachusetts—together with the territory of Puerto Rico, continue to call themselves*commonwealths*although the term retains little or nothing of its original political and social meaning. John Donne,*A Sermon Preached to the Honorable Company of the Virginian Plantation, 13th November, 1622*(London: 1622), 17.