---
title: "Epilogue: After 1619"
type: "reading"
book: "1619: Jamestown and the Forging of American Democracy"
author: "James Horn"
chapter_num: 7
source: "Horn, James - 1619- Jamestown and the Forging of American Democracy.epub"
date_added: 2026-05-25
tags:
  - hist_21103
  - reading
  - 1619
---

1619 

#*Epilogue*

## After 1619

ACROSS FOUR HUNDRED YEARS, THE CONTRASTING LEGACIES of 1619 are still with us. The arrival of Europeans and Africans in English America and their encounters with Indian peoples created a highly diverse society in which the terms of engagement as well as consequences for different peoples were starkly unequal. For Native Americans, the rapid growth of white settler populations was catastrophic on a hemispheric scale. Wars and European diseases decimated their numbers, causing massive regional depopulations and in some areas almost complete social collapse. In early Virginia, Indian peoples knew the English had come, as the great chief Wahunsonacock put it, “not for trade, but to invade… and possess” the country. Sanctioned by specious laws and racist ideology, the Powhatan wars in Virginia were merely the first episode in the use of extreme violence that involved mass killings, dispossession, and enslavement of Indians repeated over and over again across British America and, later, the United States.[1](endnotes.md#en0195en)

For Africans and their descendants, the experience of European colonization was similarly tragic. The grinding inhumanity of slavery in mainland English America lasted for nearly two and a half centuries until the carnage of the Civil War brought it to an end at Appomattox Court House, fewer than 150 miles from where the first Africans arrived at (incongruously) Point Comfort. From the mid-seventeenth century onward, as the material conditions of most whites rose dramatically—reflected by increasing wealth, better standards of living, and a life expectancy far longer than enjoyed even by their counterparts in Europe—those of African Americans languished. Whether by force, legislation, or marginalization, African Americans and Indian peoples were systematically excluded from enjoying the benefits of their own labor and consigned to the lowest substrata of poverty.

The extreme inequality, impoverishment, and de facto segregation that divide different American communities are among the most intractable social problems that face modern society. While our national credo espouses opportunity for all, the consequences of long-term discrimination and racism remain clearly evident around us. Applying any measure of net wealth, income, or social well-being, Native American peoples and African Americans are among the poorest citizens in the United States today. Throughout the nation, one in four Native Americans and African Americans live in poverty compared to one in ten whites. In addition, the former have been gravely hampered by inadequate and poor-quality public services, leading to significantly lower educational attainments and greater health and social welfare challenges. We “remain two Americas,” a recent report by the Stanford Center on Poverty and Inequality stated: a high-poverty America for African Americans and Native Americans and “a (relatively) low-poverty America for whites.” At the same time as the United States emerged as a beacon of freedom and eventually assumed leadership of the free world, domestically the impact of bigotry and intolerance has continued to disfigure the lives of countless millions of people of color. Poverty filtered by race highlights the gross inequalities among our nation’s diverse peoples, a striking and persistent feature of our social landscape that reaches far back into the past.[2](endnotes.md#en0196en)

AND YET, 1619 ALSO EMBODIES A LEGACY OF QUITE DIFFERENT meaning: the inception of the most important political development in American history, the rise of democracy. What began at Jamestown during those torrid few days of summer would have momentous consequences. Shortly before he died on July 4, 1826, Thomas Jefferson composed one of his greatest tributes to liberty in a last letter to posterity. Referring to the still novel American form of government, he wrote, “May it be to the world, what I believe it will be (to some parts sooner, to others later, but finally to all), the signal of arousing men to burst the chains under which monkish ignorance and superstition had persuaded them to bind themselves, and to assume the blessings and security of self-government.” By “the grace of God,” he concluded, “these are grounds of hope for others,” and, he might have added, for us. The felicity of self-government and its benefits were held out to future generations of peoples around the globe.[3](endnotes.md#en0197en)

In fact, the spread of self-government had begun long before. Originating in the English parliaments of the early seventeenth century, the principle that just government relied on the consent of the governed and the rule of law applied to everyone irrespective of social status was transferred to Virginia as part of the Company’s sweeping reforms of 1619. Every subsequent British American colony established its own representative assembly and judicial system that would secure and protect settlers’ lives, liberties, and properties. From colonial New England to the West Indies, historian Jack P. Greene comments, America proved to be “an extraordinarily fertile ground for parliamentary governance.

By the time of the American Revolution, most colonies had enjoyed self-government for more than a century and were able to translate their governing institutions into republican forms relatively easily; the habit of self-rule and exercise of extensive fiscal and lawmaking powers had been the norm for so long. A deeply ingrained sense of independence on the part of wealthy elites at colony and state levels emerged early and became the basis for the growth of powerful local political institutions modulated by their own regional cultures. Colonial and then state legislatures developed as the bedrock of the American political system, a finely tuned balance of local and central powers that gave expression to and celebrated citizens’ collective rights and liberties. Today, these freedoms, together with the federal and state constitutions that enshrine them, constitute the foundational principles of American democracy.[4](endnotes.md#en0198en)

Sir Edwin Sandys believed passionately that the creation of a commonwealth was the best means of establishing just laws and a fair and equitable society in America. In November 1622, six months after news of the Indian attack that had devastated the colony reached London, the poet and dean of Paul’s Church, John Donne, preached movingly to leaders of the Company, “Those amongst you that are old now, shall pass out of this world with this great comfort, that you contributed to the beginning of that Common Wealth” in Virginia. Sandys’s dream of creating a commonwealth in the interests of settlers and Indians proved short-lived. But the twin pillars of democracy—the rule of law and representative government—survived and flourished. It was his greatest legacy to America. What was lost was his steadfast conviction that serving the common good served all.[5](endnotes.md#en0199en)